The Importance of 
Bioactive Silicates 
in Human Health 

by  Guy E. Abraham, MD 

Introduction 
The  element  silicon  does  not  exist  in  nature  in  its  pure 
form but rather is always combined with oxygen.  Next 
to  oxygen,  silicon  is  the  most  abundant  element  in  the 
earth’s  crust.    Silicon  dioxide  or  silica,  SiO2,  is  formed 
by covalent binding of two atoms of oxygen to one atom 
of  silicon.    Free  silica  is  found  both  in  the  amorphous 
state  such  as  opal  and  in  the  crystalline  state  such  as 
quartz.  Biological systems are capable of forming amor-
phous microparticles of hydrated silica,  but they cannot 
form the crystalline state of silica.  Under proper condi-
tions,  one  molecule  of  silica  will  react  covalently  with 
one  molecule  of  water  to  form  monometasilicic  acid, 
H2SiO3;  combined  with  two  molecules  of  water,  it  be-
comes monoorthosilicic acid, H4SiO4.  In both plants and 
animals, monoorthosilicic acid is the biologically active 
form of silicon and silica.  Up to saturation at 100 parts 
per million (100 PPM), aqueous solution of monoortho-
silicic  acid  exists  in  its  free  form,  below  a  pH  of  9.  
Above saturation, monoorthosilicic acid loses one mole-
cule  of  water  to  form  monometasilicic  acid  which  po-
lymerizes  and  precipitates  out  of  solution  to  form  opal.  
Plant  tissues  contain  this  form  of  opal,  with  extremely 
small particle sizes.  The loss of two molecules of water 
from silicic acid results in the formation of silicic anhy-
dride,  more  commonly  known  as  silica  or  silicon  diox-
ide, SiO2.  When two molecules of monoorthosilicic acid 
combine by condensation (loss of on molecule of water), 
they  generate  disilicic  acid.    When  three  molecules  of 
monoorthosilicic  acid  combine  through  condensation, 
with the loss of four molecules of water, trisilicic acid is 
formed: 

2 H4SiO4 = H2O + H6Si2O7 

3 H4SiO4 = 4 H2O + H4Si3O8 

The natural silicates  found in rocks correspond to these 
silicic acids, combined with transition metal oxides  and 
as  salts  of  alkali  metals  (silica-mineral  complexes).  
Sixty percent of all rocks are made of silica, either in its 
pure  form  or  as  silica-mineral  complexes.    Erosion  of 

those  rocks  releases  into  the  soil,  streams,  and  ground 
water all these forms of silica and silicates.  Silica is of-
ten  the  principal  solute  in  natural  fresh  water,  where  it 
occurs  entirely  as  monoorthosilicic  acid.    The  reported 
concentrations  of  monoorthosilicic  acid,  expressed  as 
silicon,  ranged  from  0.8-5.0  PPM  in  streams  and  3.5-
28.0 PPM in ground water compared to 1.0-40.0 PPM in 
soil  solution.1-4    In  an  aqueous  environment,  hydrated 
silica releases silicic acid in solution by hydrolysis.  The 
amount  of  silicic  acid  released  is  dependent  on  the  sur-
face/volume ratio of the silica particles.  The smaller the 
particle  sizes,  the  greater  the  surface/volume  ratio  and 
the  greater  the  release  of  silicic  acid.5    Increasing  the 
zeta potential (electrical charge) of the aqueous suspen-
sion  of  silica  by  the  presence  of  alkali  metal  salts  of 
polyacidic  organic  compounds  enhances  the  hydrolysis 
and release of silicic acid.  Humic acid in the moist soil 
enhances the release of free silicic acid from the soil sil-
ica-mineral  complexes.    Coating  of  the  hydrated  silica 
particles  with  organic  compounds  stabilizes  the  silica 
particles  and  inhibits  the  release  of  silicic  acid.    These 
two  opposing  factors  control  hydrolysis  and  release  of 
free silicic acid and play an important role in the avail-
ability of silicic acid in the moist soil.1-5 

The Silica Cycle 
The silica cycle begins with the uptake of bioactive sil-
ica, that is monoorthosilicic acid, by roots of plants.  Be-
low  a  pH  of  9,  monoorthosilicic  acid,  hereafter  called 
silicic acid, exists in its free form in water up to satura-
tion (100 PPM).  After translocation, condensation, and 
precipitation  in  plant  tissues,  silicic  acid  performs  sev-
eral important functions.6 

Structural:    Silica  contributes  compression-resistance 
and rigidity to the cell walls which aids in photosynthe-
sis by improving lights interception.  It also renders the 
plant drought-resistant. 

Physiological:    The presence of silica reduces evapora-
tion and transpiration, therefore conserving tissue water.  
It  also  promotes  oxygen  availability  via  the  roots 
through increased rigidity of the air canals. 

Protective:   Silica increases the resistance to pathogens, 
insects,  and  mollucs.    It  also  protects  the  plants  from 
toxicity  of  excess  metals,  such  as  manganese  and  iron, 
by distributing these oxides evenly in plants tissues, in-
creasing their solubility.  Silicic acid also forms a silicate 
coating around microparticles of the oxides of these met-
als, increasing their stability, preventing aggregation and 
precipitation.  These microscopic amorphous particles of 
silica, and the other silica-containing plant tissues, return 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Spring   2005 

13 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
to  the  soil  for  recycling  after  the  death  and  decay  of 
plants. 

The next step in the silica cycle involves the assimilation 
of plant silica by herbivorous animals.  Although plants 
and  animals  can  combine  silicic  acid  into  organic  sub-
stances,  it  is  most  likely  via  Si-O-C  silanolate  bonding 
through condensation of a silanol group with a hydroxyl 
group  of  an  organic  compound  as  proposed  by 
Schwartz.7    The  Si-C  bond,  that  is  true  organic  silicon, 
does not exist in the earth crust, only man-made. 

Plants in the early stage of growth contain a small frac-
tion of silica in the form of silicic acid.  The proportion 
of  silicic  acid  decreases  with  the  increasing  age  of  the 
plant and approaches zero in mature plants, probably due 
to coating of the silica particles with organic polyals and 
polyphenols.    Drying  of  plant  tissues  causes  condensa-
tion of  silicic  acid,  so  that  silicic  acid  concentrations  in 
dried  plants  of  any  age  are  reduced  markedly.    There-
fore,  a  large  proportion  of  the  ingested  silica  from  feed 
(greater  than  95%)  by  herbivorous  animals  is  not 
bioavailable.8    Silicic  acid  in  water  is  much  more 
bioavailable, and is either absorbed rapidly after a short 
transit  time  in  blood,  excreted  in  the  urine,  or  diffused 
passively in extracellular fluid compartments.  Plant tis-
sues  contain  much  larger  amounts  of  silica  than  animal 
tissues.  Plants assimilate silica from the soil more effi-
ciently than animals absorb and retain silica from plants.  
As a result, herbivorous animals excrete in their urine 10
-30 times more silica than carnivorous animals.1 

Essentiality of Bioactive Silicates in Higher Animals 
The essentiality of the element silicon in the form of bio-
active  silicates  in  higher  animals  was  demonstrated  30 
years ago by the research performed on chicks by E.M. 
Carlisle9 and on rats by K. Schwartz10 from the Univer-
sity  of  California  at  Los  Angeles.    These  researchers 
used  sodium  monomethasilicate  (Na2SiO3)  to  supple-
ment the diet of chicks and rats made deficient in silicon 
by  a  low  silicon  diet.    The  addition  of  one  molecule  of 
water to metasilicic acid generates silicic acid in the in-
testinal tract.  Silicon, in the form of bioactive silicates, 
was  found  to  be  essential  for  normal  growth,  bone  for-
mation and production of connective tissue in chicks and 
rats.  In young growing bones, the concentrations of sili-
con were in the same ranges as the concentrations of cal-
cium,  magnesium,  and  phosphorus.    As  the  bones  pro-
gress  to  maturity,  silicon  is  progressively  replaced  with 
calcium,  suggesting  that  silicon  plays  a  role  in  the  for-
mation of bone matrix prior to calcium deposition.11 

Carlisle investigated further the mechanism of action of 
silicon  in  growth  and  health.    The  highest  silicon  con-

centrations  generally  occur  in  connective  tissues,  and 
organs  with  the  highest  amounts  of  connective  tissue 
have the highest concentrations of silicon.  When several 
tissues  from  rats  were  analyzed  for  silicon  content,  the 
aorta,  trachea,  and  tendon  were  4-5  times  richer  in  sili-
con  than  liver,  heart,  and  muscle.12    The  skin  also  was 
found to contain high levels of silicon.  Aging causes a 
decrease  in  silicon  concentrations  only  in  the  aorta  and 
the  skin.    In  12-week-old  rabbits,  the  mean  concentra-
tions  of  silicon  were  respectively  in  the  aorta  and  the 
skin  80  µg  Si/gm  tissue  (dry  weight)  and  45  µg  Si/gm 
tissue.  At 18-24 months of age, the levels dropped to 15 
and  9  µg/gm  respectively.    The  skin  of  fetal  pigs  aver-
aged 95 µg Si/gm dry weight, compared to 10 µg/gm in 
mature pigs.  No change was observed with aging in sili-
con concentrations of the heart, liver, and muscle. 

Further  research  by  Carlisle  revealed  that  the  high  sili-
con  content  of  connective  tissue  arises  mainly  from  its 
presence  as  an  integral  component  of  the  glycosami-
noglycans (mucopolysaccharides) and their protein com-
plexes.  Extraction and fractionation of connective tissue 
showed the glycosaminoglycan-protein complexes to be 
high in silicon.  Through further purification, the silicon 
was  recovered  in  glycosaminoglycan  fraction.    Enzy-
matic  hydrolysis  of  glycosaminoglycans  did  not  release 
free silicic acid but rather yielded products of lower mo-
lecular  weight,  still  containing  silicon  in  bound  form.  
Even  disaccharides  of  chondroitin  sulfate  A  contained 
significant  amounts  of  silicon  in  bound  form.10    Silicon 
also increases the hexosamine content of articular carti-
lage. 

Collagen,  which  is  present  in  connective  tissue,  is  the 
most  abundant  of  all  proteins  in  higher  vertebrates,  ac-
counting  for  up  to  one-third  or  more  of  the  total  body 
protein.  Carlisle demonstrated that silica in its bioactive 
forms, plays an important role in collagen synthesis.13,14  
Collagen contains 12% of the aminoacid proline and 9% 
of  4-hydroxyproline.    Silica  increases  synthesis  of 
proline from glutamic acid.  In the presence of iron and 
vitamin  C,  silica  enhances  markedly  hydroxylation  of 
proline residues of procollagen to form collagen.  Silica 
also  promoted  the  formation  of  extracellular  matrix 
(ground  substance)15  with  a  concomitant  increase  in  in-
terstitial fluid, due to hydration of the extracellular sub-
stances. 

Metabolism of Silicon in Man 
In most studies of bioactive silicates performed on man, 
the  values  reported  are  expressed  as  concentrations  of 
the  element  silicon  (Si).    The  compounds  measured, 
however,  were  obviously  not  pure  Si  but  derivatives  of 
(Continued on next page) 

14 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Spring   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
silica and silicic acid.  To convert values expressed as Si 
to values expressed as silica, multiply by 2.14.  To con-
vert  values  from  Si  to  silicic  acid,  multiply  by  3.4.  
When  values  reported  in  publications  are  expressed  in 
molar  concentrations,  these  conversion  factors  do  not 
apply. 

Balance Studies:  To this point, the only silicon balance 
study on humans that has been published was performed 
at the US Department of Agriculture in Beltsville, Mary-
land.16    Eleven  male  subjects,  ranging  from  37  to  58 
years of age were evaluated over two periods of 26 days.  
The  subjects  alternated  between  two  different  diets:    a 
low-fiber diet consisting of juice from fruits and vegeta-
bles and a high-fiber diet consisting of fruits and vegeta-
bles.    During  the  last  seven  days,  balance  studies  were 
performed daily, and the mean values reported.  The low
-fiber diet contained 4.6 gm of fiber and 21 mg Si/day; 
the  high-fiber  diet  contained  23.8  gm  of  fiber  and  45.8 
mg Si/day.  The mean ±SEM of the daily silicon levels 
in urine and fecal excretions were 12.2±1.1 mg Si (urine) 
and  12.3±0.9  mg  Si  (fecal  excretion)  for  the  low-fiber 
diet.    For  the  high  fiber  diet,  those  values  were  16±2.6 
mg Si and 44.4±2.6 mg Si.  The mean percentage of Si 
intake recovered in fecal excretions were 59.0±5.3% for 
the low-fiber diet and 96.5±4.3% for the high-fiber diet.  
With both diets, a negative silicon balance was obtained, 
with  mean daily losses of 3.5±1.6 mg and 14.6±3.5  mg 
Si for the low- and high-fiber diets, respectively.   

When  balance  studies  are  performed  on  essential  trace 
elements, a negative balance means that, under the con-
ditions  of  the  experiment,  more  nutrients  would  be  re-
quired  to  achieve  balance.    Surprisingly,  the  high-fiber 
diet, with intake of Si twice as high as the low-fiber diet, 
resulted  in  a  daily  loss  of  Si  four  times  higher  than  the 
low-fiber  diet.    The  percentage  of  Si  in  the  diet  recov-
ered in fecal excretions on the high fiber diet (96.5±4.3%) 
is  similar  to those observed in farm  animals.8  Since  the 
bioactive and bioavailable form of silicon is silicic acid, 
the above results could be explained by the greater solu-
bility  of  silicic  acid  in  the  liquid  diet  of  the  low  fiber 
regimen.  It is likely that food fiber does not contribute 
significantly to the bioavailable pool of silicic acid in the 
intestinal  tract  and  may  even  interfere  with  the  absorp-
tion of free silicic acid. 

Silicon Levels in Biological Fluids:  Over a wide range 
of  intakes,  serum  silicon  levels  are  maintained  within  a 
narrow range because of a very efficient renal clearance 
system.  Renal clearance of silicon is similar to glomeru-
lar filtration rate (GFR) with the implication that silicon 
as  silicic  acid  is  passively  cleared  by  the  kidney  and  is 
dependant on the GFR.  In patients with decreased GFR, 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Spring   2005 

serum silicic acid increases in proportion with the degree 
of renal impairment. 

Silicon exists in serum exclusively as silicic acid and is 
diffused  passively  into  the  extravascular  extracellular 
fluid  compartments  where  silicon  concentrations  are 
maintained  in  the  same  range  as  those  in  serum.17    In 
herbivorous  animals  like  sheep  and  cattle,  serum  silicic 
acid  levels  are  twice  as  high  as  in  man.    Urine  silicon 
excretion depends on bioavailable silicon in the diet and 
renal function. 

Dobbie  and  Smith  measured  the  levels  of  silicon  in  se-
rum and urine in normal subjects of both sexes on differ-
ent diets and in patients with renal impairment.18  In one 
woman  on  water  only,  the  intake  of  silicon  was  16 
micromoles/day,  and  the  urinary  excretion  was  16 
micromoles/day;  that  is  100%  of  the  silicon  intake.    In 
nine male subjects on a dairy diet consuming an average 
of  3.4  liters  of  milk/day,  the  mean  silicon  daily  intake 
was  96  micromoles  and  24-hr  urinary  excretion  was 
130.0±0.13 micromoles, a negative balance of 34 micro-
moles, or 0.95 mg Si per day, which is a minimum since 
fecal excretion of Si was not measured.  In subjects on a 
“normal  diet”  (73  male  and  67  female  subjects),  the 
main  silicon  excretion  in  the  24-hr  urine  collections 
ranged from 200-310 micromoles, or 5.6-8.7 mg Si/day.  
In  five  male  and  nine  female  subjects  consuming  5  gm 
of  magnesium  trisilicate  (an  antacid)  containing  1.6  gm 
of silicon (57 millimoles), the mean ± SD of silicon level 
in  the  24-hr  urine  collections  was  3.1±1.02  millimoles, 
that is 5% of the amount ingested. 

In  patients  with  renal  impairment  on  a  normal  diet,  the 
amount of silicon excreted was proportional to the GFR, 
with  0.288±0.114  millimole/24-hr  in  42  patients  with 
GFR  above  100  ml/min  and  0.136±0.057  millimoles  in 
57  patients  with  GFR  below  20  ml/min.    Serum  silicon 
levels in 10 men and 11 women with chronic renal fail-
ure were about twice as high as levels observed in nor-
mal subjects. 

In random blood samples obtained from normal subjects, 
the  level  of  serum  silicon  (X±SD)  was  21.3±5  micro-
moles/L  for  95  male  subjects  and  21.7±5  for  78  female 
subjects.    No  significant  difference  was  observed  be-
tween  the  sexes.    The  authors  did  not  specify  the  men-
strual status of the female subjects, that is, whether they 
were pre- or post-menopausal.  As we will discuss later, 
post-menopausal women were found to have lower lev-
els  of  serum  silicic  acid  compared  to  pre-menopausal 
women. 

(Continued on next page) 

15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Review of Some Pertinent Research Studies on 
Silicon with Potential Clinical Applications 
Silicon,  in  the  form  of  bioactive  mineral  silicates,  has 
been recognized for 30 years as an essential element par-
ticipating  in  the  normal  metabolism  of  higher  animals.  
So far, these finding have not been translated into practi-
cal  recommendations  for  human  health.    There  are  no 
recommended  daily  allowances,  and  no  cases  of  silicon 
deficiency  have  been  reported.    However,  there  is  con-
vincing  evidence  in  favor  of  bioactive  silicates  playing 
important  roles  in  the  maintenance  of  optimal  levels  of 
mental and physical health. 

Mental  Health:    An  association  between  silicon  defi-
ciency  and  Alzheimer’s  disease  (AD)  was  proposed  by 
Carlisle  in  1987.19    Five  percent  of  the  population  over 
70 years of age suffers from AD.  Another important fact 
is that AD is twice as common in women as in men.20  In 
an  attempt  to  reproduce  in  old  rats  the  neurotoxicity  of 
aluminum observed in AD and to evaluate the protective 
effect  of  silicon,  Carlisle  studied  the  effects  of  silicon 
and aluminum supplementation in the diet of female rats 
on silicon and aluminum levels in 12 brain regions.  Two 
ages of female rats were studied:  22 days old (weanling 
rats)  and  10  months  old  (Carlisle  called  them  “retired 
female breeders”).  We will call them young and old fe-
male rats.  Groups of rats were assigned to four dietary 
regiments: 

1)  Low silicon diet. 

2)  Silicon  supplementation  using  sodium  metasili-

cate at 600 PPM in the diet. 

3)  Low  silicon  diet,  plus  aluminum  supplementa-
tion,  with  aluminum  oxide  or  chloride  at  5,000 
PPM in the diet. 

4)  Silicon  supplementation  +  aluminum  supple-

mentation. 

The  experiment  was  carried  out  for  22  months  in  the 
four  groups  of  young  rats;  and  18  months  in  the  four 
groups of old rats. 

At the end of the experiment, silicon and aluminum were 
measured  in  12  different  brain  regions.    There  was  no 
significant  difference  between  the  aluminum  levels  of 
the 12 brain regions in the low silicon diet of young and 
old rats.  On the low silicon diet, aluminum supplemen-
tation showed no effect on brain aluminum levels in the 
young  rats  but  increased  brain  aluminum  levels  signifi-
cantly  in  the  hippocampus  and  posterior  cortex  of  old 
rats.  Aluminum supplementation had no effect on brain 
aluminum  levels  in  silicon  supplemented  old  rats,  sug-
gesting  a  protective  role  of  bioactive  silicates,  in  ade-

quate  amounts,  against  aluminum  neurotoxicity  in  old 
age.   

Regarding  brain  silicon  levels,  there  were  differences 
between the 12 brain regions examined, with the highest 
levels  observed  in  the  hippocampus,  caudate,  lentiform 
nucleus, posterior cortex, olfactory bulbs and mid brain.  
Silicon supplementation increased brain silicon levels in 
the  caudate,  hippocampus  and  lenticular  nucleus,  the 
areas  involved  in  AD.    Aluminum  supplementation  de-
creased  brain  silicon  levels,  mainly  in  the  caudate,  hip-
pocampus and lentiform nucleus.  In the discussion sec-
tion of her publication, Carlisle compared her results in 
rats  with  data  available  in  human  subjects.    The  age  of 
her old rats approximates the age of 70 years in humans.  
In both rats and humans, the brain becomes more perme-
able to aluminum with aging.  In both old rats and men, 
the  highest  concentrations  of  aluminum  were  found  in 
the hippocampus.  The protective role of silicon against 
aluminum  neurotoxicity  in  old  age  is  reflected  by  the 
observation  that  in  the  old  rats  supplemented  with  sili-
con,  aluminum  supplementation  did  not  increase  brain 
aluminum levels, whereas in the low silicon group of old 
rats, brain aluminum increased following aluminum sup-
plementation. 

Carlisle  commented,  “The  finding  that  aluminum  sup-
plementation of the diet results in a significant decrease 
in  brain  silicon  content  in  selected  regions  of  the brain, 
including  those  regions  thought  to  be  involved  in  Alz-
heimer’s  disease,  may  be  important  …  If  silicon  per-
forms a role in brain metabolism, it is possible that alu-
minum  may  interfere  with  some  specific  silicon  func-
tion.  The variations in regional brain silicon concentra-
tions  support  the  possibility  that  silicon  may  be  a  func-
tional  trace  element  in  the  brain.    The  significantly 
higher levels of silicon in brain compared to plasma (p < 
0.05),  especially  in  certain  regions  (e.g.,  the  hippocam-
pus,  caudate,  and  lentiform  nucleus),  even  on  very  low 
dietary  levels  of  silicon,  also  support  this  possibility …
silicon appears to protect rats against aluminum induced 
abnormal behavior.” 

In  support  of  Carlisle’s  postulate,  Charnot  has  reported 
decreased  levels  of  serum  silicic  acid  following  meno-
pause in women, and following castration in women and 
female  rats.21    Serum  silicic  acid  levels  in  castrated  fe-
male rats were about 50% of the serum levels observed 
in control female rats.  No effect was observed on serum 
silicic acid in castrated male rats.  This could explain the 
higher incidence of AD in post-menopausal women ver-
sus old men.  In the 15th Edition of Harrison’s Principle 
of  Internal  Medicine  published  in  2001,21  a  recent  pro-
(Continued on next page) 

16 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Spring   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
spective  study  is  quoted,  on  the  effect  of  estrogen  re-
placement  therapy  on  the  prevention  of  AD  in  women.  
“Estrogen  replacement  therapy  appeared  to  protect  by 
about  50%  against  the  development  of  AD  in  women.”  
The effect of estrogen could be via increased peripheral 
silicic acid levels and, subsequently, increased brain bio-
active silicate and silanolate levels.  The response to es-
trogen in those women would probably be better if sup-
plemented with bioactive silicates. 

No published study, so far, has attempted to evaluate the 
effect of bioactive silica on either prevention or cure of 
AD.  Since there are no recommended daily allowances, 
the daily amount administered in such studies would be 
tentative  and  depend  on  the  form  of  bioactive  silicates 
supplemented.    Carlisle’s  study  in  rats  used  600  PPM 
silicon as sodium metasilicates in the diet consumed.  A 
200-gm rat consumes an average of 20 gm of dry food/
day.  Therefore, those rats would consume the equivalent 
of  60  mg  Si/kg  body  weight.    For  a  70-kg  human,  that 
computes  to  4.2  gm  Si,  which  seems  an  excessive 
amount.  However, the antacid, magnesium trisilicate, is 
consumed  at  those  levels  of  Si  daily  by  some  individu-
als.  We do not know the bioavailability of sodium meta-
silicate under the conditions of Carlisle’s experiments. 

In 115-lb sheep, balance studies showed that the fraction 
of silicon absorbed is dependant of the amount ingested.8  
On  three  different  diets  containing  a  daily  average  of 
0.85  gm,  8.5  gm,  and  22  gm  of  silica  (measured  as  sil-
ica),  the  percentage  of  silica  intake  recovered  in  24-hr 
urine  collections  (measured  as  silica)  were  3.5,  1.7  and 
0.8.    The  ingested  amounts  expressed  as  mg  silica/kg 
BW/day would be 18, 180, and 490 (8.4, 84, and 220 if 
expressed as silicon).  Since Carlisle’s rats consumed 60 
mg  Si/kg  BW/day,  the  bioavailability  would  be  about 
2%,  or  1.2  mg  Si/kg  BW/day.    For  a  70-kg  human,  the 
amount of bioavailable and bioactive silicon required to 
neutralize  the  neurotoxic  effect  of  aluminum,  would  be 
84  mg  Si/day.    The  amount  of  aluminum  consumed  by 
human subjects from an average diet is much lower22 than 
the levels present in Carlisle’s diet of aluminum supple-
mentation.    However,  aluminum  contamination  of  food 
and drink and the amount of aluminum in OTC medica-
tions may contribute to such high levels of aluminum in 
some individuals.   

The protective role of silicic acid against aluminum tox-
icity has been demonstrated in vitro by Birchall and Es-
pie.23  The enzyme prolylhydroxylase is required for col-
lagen synthesis.  Silicon, in the presence of iron and vita-
min  C,  enhances  the  activity  of  this  enzyme  in  vitro.14  
Aluminum competes with iron for binding sites on pro-
lylhydroxylase  and  inhibits  this  enzyme  in  the  proper 

ratio with iron.  The inhibition of this enzyme by alumi-
num  at  100  micromolar  concentration  could  be  pre-
vented  with  silicic  acid  added  at  600  micromolar  con-
centration.    It  is  possible  that  the  right  amount  of  the 
right  bioactive  silicates  may  not  only  prevent  AD  but 
also  reverse  it.    Since  the  anatomical  lesions,  together 
with high, localized aluminum concentrations, observed 
in certain regions of the brain of AD patients24 were also 
found  in  patients  with  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis,25 
bioactive  silicates  may  also  be  effective  in  non-AD  re-
lated neurotoxicity of aluminum. 

Physical  Health:    As previously mentioned, high levels 
of silicon occur in the organs with the highest amount of 
connective  tissue  such  as  the  aorta,  trachea,  skin,  ten-
dons,  and  bones.    The  finding  by  Carlisle12  that  silicon 
deficiency  is  manifested  by  abnormalities  involving  ar-
ticular cartilage and connective tissue has potential clini-
cal applications in arthritic conditions. 

In studies performed in animals and men, aging causes a 
progressive  decrease  of  silicon  concentrations  only  in 
the aorta and the skin.  Loss of skin silicon in old age is 
associated  with  loss  of  interstitial  water  with  decreased 
formation of collagen, glycosaminoglycans, and hexosa-
mine.  Bioactive silica supplementation may improve the 
texture of the skin in older individuals by increasing syn-
thesis  of  these  substances,  resulting  in  increased  hydra-
tion of the extracellular matrix. 

Of  greater  clinical  implication,  however,  is  the  loss  of 
silicon in the aorta with aging.  Loeper, et al,26 observed 
that  in  man  and  rabbits  high  concentrations  of  silicon 
were  found  in  the  aorta, which  is  very  rich  in  collagen, 
elastin,  and  glycosaminoglycans.    In  the  rabbits,  the 
aorta  contained  the  highest  levels  of  silicon,  5-10  times 
higher  than  levels  in  the pancreas,  liver,  heart,  and  kid-
neys.    Loeper  measured  silicon  levels  in  human  aortas 
with  different  degrees  of  atheromatous  lesions.    With 
values expressed as µg Si/100 mg nitrogen, he observed 
the following: 

1)  In 19 cases with a normal aorta (i.e., no athero-
matous lesion), 180±21 µg Si/100 mg nitrogen. 

2)  In  28  cases  with  moderate  aorta  damage  (i.e., 
one  or  two  plaques),  105±12  µg  Si/100  mg  ni-
trogen. 

3)  In  22  cases  with  serious  aorta  damage  (i.e.,  nu-
merous  atheromatous  plaques),  63±8  µg  Si/100 
mg nitrogen. 

Loeper  then  studied  the  effect  of  bioactive  silicates  in 
rabbits on a high cholesterol diet for two months.  Out of 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Spring   2005 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
31  rabbits  that  received  cholesterol,  24  suffered  from 
atherosclerotic  lesions  of  the  aorta.    Out  of  28  rabbits 
who  received  the  cholesterol  diet  plus  intravenous  sili-
cates (sodium silicate, lysine silicate, or monomethyltris-
ilanol) at 10 mg every other day, only six aortas showed 
atheromatous  lesions.    The  other  22  samples  were  per-
fectly healthy with smooth and shiny walls.  Among 10 
rabbits  who  received  the  cholesterol  diet  plus  oral  sili-
cate  (sodium  silicate)  at  10  mg/day,  three  out  of  the  10 
showed atheromatous lesions.  Overall, 77% of the rab-
bits  on  the  cholesterol  diet  developed  aortic  lesions, 
compared  to  a  combined  rate  in  both  groups  receiving 
silicon (IV or oral) of 23%.  Loeper further observed that 
elastin fibers of the aorta contain a high level of silicon.  
Silicate supplementation increased the thickness and the 
integrity of elastin.   

In another publication by Loeper,27 three groups of rab-
bits followed for two months were studied for atheroma-
tous lesions of the aorta.  In the control group of 15 rab-
bits, 14 had no lesions, and one rabbit had two atheroma-
tous plaques.  In 18 rabbits fed a high cholesterol diet for 
two months, only two were without lesions.  Out of the 
16  with  lesions,  eight  were  moderate,  and  eight  were 
severe  with  multiple  plaques.    In  the  third  group  of  18 
rabbits fed the high cholesterol diet for two months  but 
with  supplementation  concurrently,  using  10  mg  mono-
methytrisilanol  IV  every  other  day,  14  rabbits  had  nor-
mal aortas without any lesions, three presented with one 
or  two  lesions,  and  one  had  several  plaques.    The  male 
rabbits used by Loeper weighted 2.5 kg and received 10 
mg  IV  every  other  day.    Since  the  IV  mode  of  admini-
stration  is  100%  bioavailable,  10  mg  every  other  day 
would give a daily amount of 5 mg.  Since the molecular 
weight of monomethytrisilanol is 110, 5 mg of this prod-
uct  would  be  equivalent  to  1.25  mg  Si/day.    Corrected 
for  body  weight  and  expressed  per  kg/BW/day,  the 
amount would be 0.5 mg Si.  For a 70-kg person, 35 mg 
Si/day in the form of bioavailable and bioactive mineral 
silicates would be required. 

The  protective  role  of  bioactive  silicates  against  tumors 
in  general,  and  brain  tumors  in  particular,  was  reported 
by Carlisle.28  When she kept several generations of rats 
on  a  low-silicon  diet,  the  incidence  of  tumors,  overall, 
was higher than rats supplemented with sodium metasili-
cate.    In  a  longitudinal  study  lasting  two  years  in  the 
same generation of rats, equivalent to a 70-year longitu-
dinal  study  in  human  subjects,  the  low  silicon  diet  re-
sulted  in  brain  tumors  in  60%  of  the  rats  but  no  tumor 
was  observed  in  the  group  on  the  silicon  supplemented 
diet.  The clinical implications of such findings in cancer 
prevention, in general, and brain tumor, in particular, are 
obvious.    Since  reported  17  years  ago,  no  follow-up 

study has appeared in the scientific literature, due to Car-
lisle’s untimely death. 

Discussion 
The problems with silicon breast implants have given a 
bad name to silicon.  Pulmonary complications of silico-
sis,  an  industrial  lung  pathology,  due  to  inhalation  of 
crystalline silica particles, such as asbestos (fibrous sili-
cates of complex composition), has given a bad name to 
silica.    Proper  education  would  be  required  in  order  to 
make  a  distinction  between  the  forms  of  silica  and  sili-
con  mentioned  above  and  the  very  important  bioactive 
forms of silica, that is silicic acid and amorphous silica-
mineral  complexes,  which  could  play  an  important  role 
in brain function with application to AD and old age de-
mentia.    Besides  AD,  attention  deficit  disorders  (ADD) 
may  be  another  area  worth  investigating  with  bioactive 
silicate supplementation.   

One approach that has been suggested to lower the inci-
dence of AD and dementia due to aluminum neurotoxic-
ity is to increase fluoride levels in drinking water above 
the  EPA  limits  of  1.4-2.4  mg/L.29 and vide infra    Fluoride 
blocks  the  absorption  of  aluminum  from  the  intestinal 
tract  by  forming  an  aluminum-fluoride  complex.    One 
study  in  three  counties  of  South  Carolina  revealed  that 
two  counties  with  fluoride  levels  within  the  EPA  limits 
experienced  a  high  annual  incidence  of  primary  degen-
erative dementia (PDD) in the population above 55 years 
of age:  17.1/100,00 and 20.8/100,000.  However, in the 
county with high fluoride levels (4.18 mg/L) in the water 
supply, the incidence of PPD was only 3.6/100,000.  Us-
ing  high  levels  of  fluoride  to  prevent  aluminum  neuro-
toxicity is not a good idea.  To start with, activated alu-
mina is used in water treatment plants to remove fluoride 
from  water  apparently  in  order  to  prevent  mottling  of 
tooth  enamel.    This  procedure  is  the  cause  of  elevated 
aluminum  in  drinking  water  to  start  with.    It  does  not 
make sense to put fluoride back into municipal water in 
order  to  neutralize  the  neurotoxicity  of  aluminum  after 
removing  fluoride  with  alumina  gel  in  water  treatment 
plants.    Besides,  fluoride  has  its  own  problems  —  ad-
verse  effects  on  bone  integrity,  thyroid  function,  and 
cognition,30-32 just to name three problems.  There must 
be  a  better  way,  and  it  may  include  bioactive  silicates.  
Future research would dictate the form of bioactive sili-
cates most appropriate for replacement and supplementa-
tion.  If Carlisle’s postulate regarding an essential role of 
silicates  in  brain  function  is  valid,  and  if  silicon  defi-
ciency  in  the  form  of  bioactive  silicates  is  involved  in 
AD, ADD, atherosclerosis, and arthritis, a good starting 
point would be to titrate the amount of bioavailable and 
bioactive silicates required to reverse these pathologies.  
(Continued on next page) 

18 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Spring   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
The formulation of a silica-mineral complex should take 
into  consideration  the  available  data  on  the  factors  in-
volved in the availability of silicic acid in the moist soil 
and  the  bioavailability  of  silicic  acid  from  silica  in  its 
different  forms  in  animals  and  men.    The  smaller  the 
particle sizes of silica, the greater the hydrolysis of silica 
and  the  greater  the  release  of  silicic  acid.    Next  to  an 
aqueous  solution  of  silicic  acid,  which  is  the  most 
bioavailable form, microparticles of silica-mineral com-
plexes  combined  with  organic  polyacids  in  a  solid  dos-
age form may be the next best alternative. 

About the Author 

Guy E. Abraham, MD, is a former Professor of Obstet-
rics,  Gynecology,  and  Endocrinology  at  the  UCLA 
School  of  Medicine.    Some  35  years  ago,  he  pioneered 
the development of assays to measure minute quantities 
of  steroid  hormones  in  biological  fluids.    He  has  been 
honored as follows:  General Diagnostic Award from the 
Canadian  Association  of  Clinical  Chemists,  1974;  the 
Medaille  d’Honneur  from  the  University  of  Liege,  Bel-
gium,  1976;  the  Senior  Investigator  Award  of  Phar-
macia,  Sweden,  1980.    The  applications  of  Dr.  Abra-
ham’s  techniques  to  a  variety  of  female  disorders  have 
brought  a  notable  improvement  to  the  understanding 
and management of these disorders. 

Twenty-five  years  ago,  Dr.  Abraham  developed  nutri-
tional  programs  for  women  with  premenstrual  tension 
syndrome and post-menopausal osteoporosis.  They are 
now  the  most  commonly  used  dietary  programs  by 
American  obstetricians  and  gynecologists.    Dr.  Abra-
ham’s  current  research  interests  include  the  develop-
ment  of  assays  for  the  measurement  of  iodide  and  the 
other  halides  in  biological  fluids  and  their  applications 
to  the  implementation  of  orthoiodosupplementation  in 
medical practice. 

REFERENCES 

1)  King  EJ  and  Belt  TH.  “The  physiological  and  pathological  as-

pects of silica.”  Physiol Rev, 1938; 18:329-365. 

2)  Jones  LHP  and  Handreck  KA.    “Silica  in  soils,  plants,  and  ani-
mals.”    In:    Advances  in  Agronomy.  A.G.  Norman,  Academic 
Press, New York and London, 1967; 19:108-149. 

3)  Farmer VC.  “Sources and speciation of aluminum and silicon in 
natural  waters.”    In:    Silicon  Biochemistry.    Ciba  Foundation 
Symposium 121, 1986; 4-23. 

4)  Bache BW.  “The role of soil in determining surface water com-

position.”  Wat Sci Tech, 1983; 15:33-35. 

5)  Williams RJP.  “Introduction to silicon chemistry and biochemis-
try.”    In:    Silicon  Biochemistry.    Ciba  Foundation  Symposium 
121, 1986; 24-29. 

6)  Sangster  AG  and  Hodson  MJ.    “Silica  in  higher  plants.”    In:  
Silicon  Biochemistry.    Ciba  Foundation  Symposium  121,  1986; 
90-111. 

7)  Schwarz  K.    “A  bound  form  of  silicon  in  glycosaminoglycans 
and polyuronides.”  Proc Nat Acad Sci, 1973; 70:1608-1612. 
8)  Jones  LHP  and  Handreck  KA.    “The  relation  between  the  silica 
content of the diet and the excretion of silica by sheep.”  J Agric 
Sci, 1965; 65:129-134. 

9)  Carlisle  EM.    “Silicon:    An  essential  element  for  the  chick.”  

Science, 1972; 178:619-621. 

10) Schwarz K and Miline DB.  “Growth-promotion effects of silicon 

in rats.”  Nature, 1972; 239:333-334. 

11) Carlisle EM.  “Silicon as an essential element.”  Fed Proc, 1974; 

33:1758-1766. 

12) Carlisle EM.  Silicon.  In Trace Elements in Human and Animal 

Nutrition, 5th Edition.  Walter Mertz, 1986; 373-390. 

13) Carlisle  EM  and  Alpenfels  WF.    “The  role  of  silicon  in  proline 

synthesis.”  Fed Proc, 1984; 43:680. 

14) Carlisle EM, Berger JW, and Alpenfels WF.  “A silicon require-
ment for prolyl hydroxylase activity.”  Fed Proc, 1981; 40:886. 
15) Carlisle EM and Garvey DL.  “The effect of silicon on formation 
of  extracellular  matrix  components  by  chondrocytes  in  culture.” 
Fed Proc, 1982; 41:461. 

16) Kelsay  JL,  Behall  KM,  and  Prather  ES.    “Effect  of  fiber  from 
fruits and vegetables on metabolic responses of human subjects.” 
Am J Clin Nutr, 1979; 32:1876-1880. 

17) Dobbie  JW  and  Smith  MJB.    “The  silicon  content  of  body  flu-

ids.”  Scot Med J, 1982; 27:17-19. 

18) Dobbie JW and Smith MJB.  “Urinary and serum silicon in nor-
mal  and  uraemic  individuals.”    In:    Silicon  Biochemistry.    Ciba 
Foundation Symposium 121, 1986; 194-213. 

19) Carlisle EM and Curran MJ.  “Effect of dietary silicon and alumi-
num on silicon and aluminum levels in rat brain.”  Alzh Disease 
and Asso Disorders, 1987; 2:83-89. 

20) Bird  TD.    “Alzheimer’s  disease  and  other  primary  dementias.”  
In:    Harrison’s  15th  Edition.  Principles  of  Internal  Medicine, 
2001; 2391-2398. 

21) Charnot Y and Peres G.  “Contribution a l’etude de la regulation 
endocrinienne du metabolisme silicique.”  Ann Endocrinol, 1971;  
32:397-402. 

22) Hamilton  EI  and  Minski  MJ.    “Abundance  of  the  chemical  ele-
ments  in  man’s  diet  and  possible  relations  with  environmental 
factors.”  Sci Total Envir, 1972-1973; 1:378-380. 

23) Birchall JD and Espie AW.  “Biological implications of the inter-
action (via silanol groups) of silicon with metal ions.”  In:  Sili-
con Biochemistry.  Ciba Foundation Symposium 121, 1986; 140-
159. 

24) Perl  DP  and  Brody  AR.    “Alzheimer’s  disease:    X-ray  spectro-
metric  evidence  of  aluminum  accumulation  in  neurofibrillary 
tangle-bearing neurons.”  Science, 1980; 208:297-299. 

25) Perl DP, Gajdusek DC, Garruto RM, et al.  “Intraneuronal alumi-
num  accumulation  in  amyotrophic  lateral  sclerosis  and  Parkin-
sonism-dementia of Guam.”  Science, 1982; 217:1053-1055. 
26) Loeper  J,  Goy-Loeper  J,  Rozensztajn  L,  et  al.    “The  antiathero-
matous action of silicon.”  Atherosclerosis, 1979; 33:397-408. 
27) Loeper J, Emerit J, Goy J, et al.  “Etude des acides gras et de la 
peroxydation  lipidique  dans  l’atherome  experimental  du  lapin.” 
Pathologie Biologie, 1984; 32:693-697. 

28) Carlisle  EM.    “Discussion.”  In:    Silicon  Biochemistry.    Ciba 

Foundation Symposium 121, 1986; 228. 

29) Still CN and Kelley P.  “On the incidence of primary degenera-
tive dementia vs. water fluoride content in South Carolina.”  Neu-
rotoxicol, 1980; 4:125-131. 

30) Null  G  and  Feldman  M.    “The  fluoride  controversy  continues:  

An update – Part 1.”  Townsend Letter, 2002; 233:58-62. 

31) Null  G  and  Feldman  M.    “The  fluoride  controversy  continues:  

An update – Part 1.”  Townsend Letter, 2003; 234:72-78. 

32) Null  G  and  Feldman  M.    “The  fluoride  controversy  continues:  
An update – Part 1.”  Townsend Letter, 2003; 235:117-121.  (cid:139) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Spring   2005 

19