The Wolff-Chaikoff Effect: 
Crying Wolf? 

by Guy E. Abraham, MD 

Shortly  after  the  Axis  Powers  capitulated  and  World 
War II came to an end, UC Berkley dropped a bombshell 
in  1948,  which  became  known  as  the  Wolff-Chaikoff 
(W-C) effect.1  Where the swords of many nations failed, 
the pen of two men succeeded.  The pen is mightier than 
the sword indeed.  The most effective way to destroy a 
nation  is  to  remove  iodine  from  the  food  supply.    The 
W-C  effect  resulted  in  the  removal  of  iodine  from  the 
food  supply  and  most  likely  caused  more  misery  and 
death  in  the  US  than  both world  wars combined  due to 
its  negative  impact  on  iodine  consumption  by  the  US 
population  and  on  the  use  of  inorganic,  non-radioactive 
iodine  in  medical  practice.2-4    “If  you  can’t  beat  them, 
join them, and destroy them from within.” 

The  W-C  effect  is  supposedly  the  inhibitory  effect  of 
peripheral  inorganic  iodide  (PII)  levels  equal  to  or 
greater  than  0.2  mg/L  (10-6M)  on  the  organification  of 
iodide by the thyroid gland of rats, resulting supposedly 
in hypothyroidism and goiter.  These rats never became 
hypothyroid and thyroid hormones were not measured in 
their  plasma.    Nevertheless,  the  W-C  effect,  which  did 
not even  occur  in  the rats,  was extrapolated  to  humans.  
The  correct interpretation of  the results  obtained in rats 
from the W-C experiments is:  Iodide sufficiency of the 
thyroid gland was achieved when serum inorganic iodide 
levels  reached  10-6M,  as  we  previously  discussed.2-4  
These  law-abiding  rats  refused  to  become  hypothyroid 
and instead followed their normal physiological response 
to the iodide load.  They were unjustly accused of escap-
ing from the W-C effect.  Labeling these innocent rats as 
fugitives  from  the  W-C  effect  was  a  great  injustice 
against these rodents. 

To the disgrace and stupidity of the medical profession, 
US  physicians  swallowed  the  W-C  forgery  uncritically, 
which  resulted  in  a  moratorium  on  the  clinical  use  of 
inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine  in  effective  amounts.  
However, this moratorium did not include toxic organic 
iodine-containing  drugs  and  radioiodide.    The  iodopho-
bic  mentality  prevented  further  research  on  the  require-
ment for inorganic, non-radioactive iodine by the whole 
human  body,  which  turns  out  to  be  100-400  times  the 
very recently established RDA.2-4  Prior to World War II 
and the W-C publication, US physicians used Lugol so-

lution  safely,  effectively  and  extensively  in  both  hypo- 
and  hyperthyroidism.3    Wolff  and  Chaikoff  acknowl-
edged the excellent and dramatic results achieved consis-
tently  with  the  use  of  Lugol  solution  in  hyperthyroid-
ism.1  But they postulated erroneously that these results 
were due to the fictitious W-C effect.  In the discussion 
section of their publication, Wolff and Chaikoff1 stated:  
“Ever  since  the  introduction  of  iodine  therapy  for  the 
treatment  of  Graves’  disease  by  Plummer  in  1923,6  the 
mechanism by which iodine brings about a dramatic re-
mission  of  signs  and  symptoms  in  patients  suffering 
from this disease has attracted considerable attention … 
we  do  believe  that  our  findings,  even  though  they  deal 
with normal thyroid tissue, justify the conclusion that an 
interference in organic binding of iodine by the gland is 
an integral part of the mechanism by which iodine brings 
about a remission in Graves’ disease.” 

Wartofsky,  et  al5  in  1970  evaluated  the  effect  of  Lugol 
io-
solution,  administered  at  five  drops  (30  mg 
dine/iodide) three times a day in five thyrotoxic patients.  
Following a well-designed protocol, they reported, “It is 
concluded that the rapid decrease in T4 secretion induced 
by iodine is not the result of an acute sustained inhibition 
of  T4  synthesis  (the  Wolff-Chaikoff  effect),  but  rather 
results  from  an  abrupt  decrease  in the fractional  rate  of 
thyroid  T4  release.”    Therefore,  in  hyperthyroidism,  io-
dine/iodide in Lugol at a daily dose of 90 mg induced a 
physiological  trend  toward  normalization  of  thyroid 
function,  a  beneficial  effect,  not  the  fictitious  W-C ef-
fect  as  proposed  by  Wolff  and  Chaikoff.    It  is  amazing 
that the W-C effect, which is still mentioned in iodopho-
bic  publications,  has  never  been  confirmed  in  rats  by 
other  investigators  and  has  never  been  demonstrated  in 
any animal species. 

In 1948, there was already evidence that the W-C effect, 
if it was for real in rats (and it was not), did not occur in 
humans.    The  Lugol  solution  and  saturated  solution  of 
potassium iodide (SSKI) were used extensively in medi-
cal practice for patients with asthma.  The recommended 
daily  amount  was  1,000-2,000  mg.6    This  amount  was 
used  in  patients  with  asthma,  chronic  bronchitis,  and 
emphysema for several years.  Hypothyroidism and goi-
ter  were  not  common  in  this  group  of  patients.    Those 
amounts  of  iodine  would  have  resulted  in  serum  inor-
ganic iodine levels 100 times higher than the serum inor-
ganic iodide levels of 10-6M claimed by Wolff and Chai-
koff to result in the W-C effect.3 

The most quoted reference for the validation of the W-C 
effect in humans is not the original 1948 publication, but 
a review by Wolff in 1969, with the title “Iodide goiter 
(Continued on next page) 

112 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Fall   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and  the  pharmacologic  effects  of  excess  iodide,”  pub-
lished in the American Journal of Medicine.7  This arti-
cle  was  obviously  addressed  to  clinicians,  and  coming 
from the National Institute of Health gave it credibility.  
Since  it  was  published  in  a  medical  journal,  physicians 
assumed  that  the  W-C  effect  had  been  demonstrated  in 
human  subjects,  as  insinuated  by  Wolff  in  his  review.  
The  expressions  “iodide  goiter”  and  “excess  iodide” 
were  used  effectively  by  clinical  endocrinologists  in 
their publications to create the iodophobic mentality now 
prevalent  in  the  medical  community.3    For  example, 
what  is  considered  “excess”  by  endocrinologists  repre-
sents only 3% of the average daily intake of iodide by 60 
million mainland Japanese, a population with a very low 
incidence  of  cancer  overall,  and  in  particular  of  the  fe-
male  reproductive  organs.2    Just  think  how  healthy  our 
population  would  be  if  the  average  consumption  of  io-
dine/iodide  by  supplementation  was  in  the  range  con-
sumed  by  mainland  Japanese,  i.e.,  in  the  range  recom-
mended by US physicians in the form of Lugol solution 
before World War II.3 

In the first paragraph of the 1969 publication, Dr. Wolff7 
stated the purpose of his review:  “This review concerns 
itself  with  the  effects  of  excess  iodide,  i.e.,  amounts 
greater  than  those  needed  for  the  production  of  normal 
amounts of the thyroid hormones … a rough estimate of 
the daily iodide requirement for man would be about 200 
µg of iodine per day.”  So, now, we know that Dr. Wolff 
defined excess iodide as daily intake above 200 µg and 
with the implication that the only need for iodide by the 
human body was for the synthesis of thyroid hormones.  
This review was published before the RDA for iodine was 
established  in  1980  and  confirmed  in  1989.4    Dr.  Wolff7 
arbitrarily defined four degrees of iodide excess. 

First  Degree  Excess:    Iodide  levels  slightly  above  200 
µg/day qualify for first degree excess.  “Positive iodine 
balances may be prolonged and lead to considerable in-
creases  in  hormone  stores.”    In  1964,  five  years  before 
Wolff  published  his  review,  Koutras,  et  al8  from  Scot-
land  published  a  well-designed  study  to  look  into  that 
possibility.    They  administered  potassium  iodide  to  nor-
mal subject for 12 weeks in daily amounts of 100 µg, 200 
µg,  and  800  µg.    There  was  a  proportional  increase  in 
iodide uptake by the thyroid gland, but not greater than 
6-7 mg iodide over the 12-week period.  Peripheral thy-
roid  hormone  (PBI)  did  not  change  appreciably.    The 
authors stated:  “From our evidence, it appears that, with 
all the doses used, the thyroid took up about 6-7  mg  of 
iodine  before  an  equilibrium  with  the  new  PII  (plasma 
inorganic  iodide)  was  reached.”    Regarding  the  W-C 
effect, the authors stated:  “There is no evidence that the 
same  mechanism  is  also  responsible  for  the  decreased 

iodide  utilization  which  accompanies small increases  in 
the  PII  levels.”    Wolff  made  no  reference  to  Koutras’ 
paper, although it was published in the Journal of Clini-
cal Endocrinology, not an obscure journal. 

Second  Degree  Excess:    “A  larger  amount  which  can 
inhibit iodine release from the thyrotoxic human thyroid 
gland.”  What is wrong with that?  Before the introduc-
tion of the toxic goitrogens, the thiocarbamide drugs, the 
Lugol solution was used extensively during the early and 
mid 1900s in medical practice for the treatment of hyper-
thyroidism  and  with  good  results.    With  daily  intake 
ranging  from  6  mg  to  180  mg  iodine,  a  success  rate  as 
high  as  90%  was  achieved,3  saving  patients’  thyroids 
from radioiodide and the toxic goitrogens.  

Third Degree Excess:  “A slightly greater intake which 
leads to inhibition of organic iodine formation and which 
probably  causes  iodide  goiter.    This  is  the  so-called 
Wolff-Chaikoff  effect.”    Dr.  Wolff  seems  to  contradict 
himself.    “The  rarity  of  iodide  goiter  in  the  face  of  the 
extensive exposure of a great many patients to iodide has 
not  been  satisfactorily  explained.”    Without  precon-
ceived  ideas,  it  is  easily  explained  —  inorganic,  non-
radioactive  iodine  is  safe.    “The  demonstration  of  the 
Wolff-Chaikoff  effect  in  man  remains  presumptive.”  
The demonstration of the W-C effect in any animal spe-
cies remains presumptive. 

Concerning iodide goiter, Wolff stated:  “The most com-
mon  form  of  iodide  goiter  is  that  seen  in  Hokkaido.”  
The  Japanese  authors  investigating  the  Hokkaido  goiter 
did not think iodide was the cause of the thyroid enlarge-
ment since Japanese subjects from Tokyo without goiter 
excreted similar levels of iodide in their urine.9,10  Excess 
goitrogens  in  the  diet  of  those  subjects  could  explain 
their  normal  thyroid  function  in  the  presence  of  goiter, 
and  this  problem  has  since  been  solved.    In  1994,  27 
years  after  the  original  publication  by  Suzuki,  et  al,9 
Konno, et al11 stated:  “Kelp-induced endemic goiter was 
reported  to  occur  in  the  coastal  regions  of  Hokkaido 
nearly 30 years ago.  Such goiter has now disappeared.”  
Please note that Konno, et al called it “kelp-induced goi-
ter” whereas Wolff called it “iodide-goiter,” without any 
evidence that iodide was the cause.  Wolff blamed iodide 
for the Hokkaido goiter without any scientific data, and 
further,  he  stated  that  this  iodide  goiter  was  probably 
caused by the W-C effect, a double assumption. 

Fourth  Degree  Excess:    “Very  high  levels  of  iodide 
which  saturate  the  active  transport  of  this  anion.”    We 
have  previously  demonstrated  from  a  review  of  the  lit-
erature that saturation occurs at 50 mg iodide per day in 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Fall   2005 

113 

 
 
 
 
 
 
human  adults2  and  thyroid  uptake  of  iodide  reached  a 
maximum  of  600  µg/day.    That  level  was  maintained 
when  higher  amounts  of  iodide  were  ingested.    Essen-
tially  the  thyroid  iodide  transport  system  will  pick  up 
increasing amounts of iodide as peripheral iodide levels 
increase, but up to a point.  When saturation is reached, 
however,  thyroid  hormone  levels  were  maintained 
within normal limits. 

Let  us  recapitulate  by  defining  the  W-C  effect.    When 
normal  rats  are  injected  with  a  single  intraperitoneal 
dose of potassium iodide mixed with radioiodide tracer, 
in  amounts  five  times  or  more  greater  than  the  total 
amounts of iodide measured in the thyroid gland of those 
rats,  the  organic  binding  of  radioiodide  by  the  thyroid 
becomes  undetectable  as  long  as  serum  levels  of  inor-
ganic  iodide  are  maintained  above  19  µg  percent  (10-
6M).    As  we  previously  discussed,2  radioiodide  uptake 
by  the  thyroid  gland  should  be  zero  when  stable  (non-
radioactive)  iodide  sufficiency  of  the  thyroid  gland  is 
achieved.  Therefore, the so-called blockage of organifi-
cation  of  radioiodide  by  the  thyroid  gland  when  serum 
inorganic  iodide  reached  10-6M  is  really  the  amount  of 
serum  inorganic  iodide  needed  for  thyroid  sufficiency.2  
There  is  no  blockage  of  organification  of  stable  iodide 
by the thyroid gland.   

The  fictitious  W-C  effect  initiated  the  iodophobic  era, 
which  is  still  alive  and  well  more  than  50  years  later.  
This  was  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  inorganic,  non-
radioactive  iodine  in  the  form  of  Lugol  solution,  used 
extensively by pre-World War II US physicians for both 
hypo-  and  hyperthyroidism.3    What  was  it  about  this 
publication that caused the capitulation of US physicians 
who  exchanged  Lugol  solution for thyroid  hormones in 
iodine  deficiency-induced  hypothyroidism  and  simple 
goiter and for toxic goitrogens and radioiodide in iodine 
deficiency  induced  hyperthyroidism?    The  answer  is 
medical iodophobia, the fear of using and recommending 
inorganic, non-radioactive iodine in amounts previously 
used  safely  and  effectively  in  medical  practice.    What 
was  it  in  the  1948  Wolff-Chaikoff  publication1  and  in 
Wolff’s  review7  that  resulted  in  medical  iodophobia?  
The  answer  is  that  they  were  iodophobic  publications.  
What  is  an  iodophobic  publication?    It  is  a  publication 
that  promotes  iodophobic  misinformation  in  order  to 
discourage  the  use  of  inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine 
in the proper amount.  What is the goal of discouraging 
the use of inorganic non-radioactive iodine in the proper 
amounts?  If you want to destroy a nation, remove iodine 
from their diet.  It is that simple.  This is a form of do-
mestic bioterrorism, called iodophobic bioterrorism.   

Medical iodophobia resulted in the thyroid hormone thy-

roxine  replacing  iodine  in  iodine  deficiency-induced 
simple goiter and hypothyroidism.   Thyroxine has been 
the most prescribed drug in the US for several years.  So, 
the  manufacturers  of  thyroxine  benefited  tremendously 
from this deception.  It also resulted in the destruction of 
the  thyroid  gland  by  means  of  radioiodide  in  patients 
with  hyperthyroidism  caused  by  iodine  deficiency,  al-
though  this  condition  had  previously  been  treated  suc-
cessfully with Lugol solution.3  The radioablation of the 
thyroid gland with radioiodide resulted in 90% of these 
patients becoming hypothyroid within the first year and 
thyroxine-
eventually 
consuming population.3 

the  ever-increasing 

joining 

Supplying  thyroid  hormones  to  iodine-deprived  indi-
viduals  masks  the  iodine  deficiency  and  results  in  a 
population  of  zombies,  capable  of  performing  physical 
work  but  not  able  to  think  and  reason  properly.    For 
maximum  effect,  combine  iodine  deprivation  with  goi-
trogen  saturation,  using  the  potent  goitrogens  bromide, 
fluoride,  and  perchlorate  in  the  food  and  water  supply.  
This  population  of  zombies  then  becomes  easily  influ-
enced through repetition and subliminal programming to 
believe  lies  and  deception  even  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  
Iodine deprived Christian America became vulnerable to 
the  pagan  influences  of  Eastern  Mysticism,  and  New 
Age Occultism, which were incorporated in the practice 
of medicine and adopted by the public at large.  Eighteen 
million  Americans  practice  yoga,  a  form  of  worship  of 
the Hindu god, Shiva.   

Iodine  is  involved  in  many  vital  mental  and  physical 
functions, and yet whole body sufficiency for iodine has 
never  been  determined.    Why?    Medical  textbooks  dis-
cuss inorganic, non-radioactive iodine only in relation to 
the  most  severe  deficiencies  of  this  essential  element: 
cretinism,  hypothyroidism,  and  endemic  goiter.    Based 
on an iodine/iodide loading test developed by the author 
to assess whole body sufficiency for iodine, the amounts 
of iodine needed for whole body sufficiency and optimal 
physical  and  mental  health  are  250-1,000  times  higher 
than  the  amount  of  iodine  needed  to  control  cretinism, 
hypothyroidism, and endemic goiter.3-4 

The use of optimal amounts of iodine in the prevention 
of  cancer  of  the  female  reproductive  organs  was  pro-
posed by Stadel, from the National Institute of Health in 
1976,  29  years  ago.12    So  far,  no  such  study  has  been 
published.    There  seems  to  be  a  moratorium  on  iodine 
research in effective amounts, thanks to the W-C effect.  
Dr. B. Eskin has attempted to reproduce in human sub-
jects  his  excellent  results  on  iodine  and  breast  cancer 
observed in female rats.13-15  He proposed clinical studies 
(Continued on next page) 

114 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Fall   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
in  human  subjects  using  iodine  in  amounts  based  on 
bodyweight equivalent to those observed to be effective 
in the rats.  He was told this could not be done because 
of the W-C effect.16 

The  W-C  effect  combined  with  medical  stupidity  has 
caused  enough  damage.    It  is  time  US  physicians  and 
other health care professionals wake up and realize that 
they have been deceived.  They should stop crying Wolff 
and shake off the W-C effect.  They need to stay awake 
and alert because the Axis Powers will strike back once 
they  realize  that  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  forgery  has  now 
been exposed and US citizens are now waking up to the 
fact  that  they  have  been  deceived  by  agents  of  foreign 
powers planted at strategic positions in academia and the 
regulatory agencies.   

Since  our  series  of  publications  exposing  the  damaging 
effect  of  medical  iodophobia,2-4, 17-20  there  is  evidence 
that  the  Empire  has  put  into  action  its  damage  control 
team.    We  have  previously  documented  the  relatively 
high intake of iodine by mainland Japanese with a mean 
daily intake of 13.8 mg.2  This amount was confirmed by 
spot urine samples from a large group of mainland Japa-
nese.21  This author calculated that Japanese fetuses are 
exposed to maternal serum iodide levels of 10-5M to 10-
6M,  which  is  the  ideal  range  for  optimal  function.4  
Mainland Japanese are one of the healthiest populations 
on  earth.2    Over  95%  of  the  iodine  consumed  by 
mainland  Japanese  are  obtained  from  seaweed.    By  re-
moving  seaweed  from  the  Japanese  diet,  their  daily  in-
take of iodine would drop 100-fold and would reach the 
low levels of intake observed in the US. 

If  iodine  gains  publicity  as  the  active  ingredient in  sea-
weed, protecting  mainland Japanese from the degenera-
tive  diseases  of  the  Western  World,  this  would  be  a 
deathblow to iodophobic bioterrorism.  In order to main-
tain the iodophobic mentality, it is necessary to keep em-
phasizing  the  toxicity  of  iodine  in  seaweed;  and  then, 
divert attention from the fact that iodine is the active in-
gredient in seaweed against cancers of the female repro-
ductive  organs  and  against  many  of  the  diseases  of 
Western  civilization.    In  your  list  of  possible  bioactive 
anticarcinogenic  substances  in  seaweed,  avoid  mention-
ing iodine.  This is a form of doublespeak.  Seaweed is 
bad for you because it contains the toxic element iodine; 
seaweed is good for you because of some unknown fac-
tors  protecting  you  against  breast  cancer,  but  more  re-
search  is  needed.    This  kind  of  confusion  works  effec-
tively in a population that is already iodine deprived.  It 
would become totally ineffective if the target population 
becomes  iodine  sufficient  because  the  improved  cogni-
tion induced by iodine sufficiency would render this de-

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Fall   2005 

ception very transparent. 

With  the  above  information  as  background,  let  us  now 
examine  iodophobic  propaganda  in  action.    There  are 
two major ways that this is being done. 

1)  Emphasizing  the  toxicity  of  iodine  in  seaweed 
using  newborns  and  children  as  victims  to  get 
the greatest emotional impact.   

2)  Diverting  attention  from  the  fact  that  iodine  is 
the active ingredient in seaweed against the car-
cinogenic  effect  of  estrogens  on  female  repro-
ductive  organs  and  against  many  other  diseases 
of  the  Western  World  while  pointing  to  some 
other  factors  in  seaweed  eliciting  these  benefi-
cial effects. 

And  to  do all this  effectively,  they  make  sure  the iodo-
phobic publications get wide coverage on the Internet.   

Emphasizing the Toxicity of Iodine in Seaweed 
Newborns  as  Victims:    In  the  December  2004  issue of 
Thyroid, Japanese investigators22 reported the that out of 
37,724  Japanese  infants  screened  for  congenital  hypo-
thyroidism,  34  infants  had  elevated  serum  TSH  levels.  
Out  of  the  34  infants,  no  cause  could  be  found  for  15 
cases, so the authors decided that in these 15 cases, the 
cause of elevated TSH was due to “excess iodine” intake 
by  the  mothers  during  pregnancy.    The  authors  stated: 
“We detected no other cause of hyperthyrothrophinemia 
among these 15 infants.”  Did they really look for other 
causes?    Nishiyama,  et  al20 did  not  fail  to  mention  the 
fictitious  W-C  effect  as  the  cause  of  elevated  TSH  and 
reduced thyroxine in these 15 infants even though these 
infants  had  normal  free  thyroxine  levels  and  Wolff  and 
Chaikoff never demonstrated elevated TSH and low thy-
roxine in their rats, and for that matter in any animal spe-
cies:  “Because of antithyroid effects of an iodine excess, 
the  so-called  Wolff-Chaikoff  effect,  which  blocks  the 
uptake  of  iodine  by  the  thyroid  gland,  leads  to  reduced 
T4  and  increased  TSH.”    According  to  Wolff,7  iodine 
intake of 2 mg or more is considered “excessive and po-
tentially harmful.”  So, Nishiyama, et al22 divided those 
15  infants  into  two  groups:    one  group  with  maternal 
intake of iodine below 2 mg and another group with ma-
ternal intake above 2 mg.  However, in both groups, the 
reported  intake  of  iodine  by  the  pregnant  women  was 
much lower than the national average intake of iodine.2 

Nishiyama,  et  al22  reported  that  their  so-called  control 
group  of  pregnant  women  ingested  only  0.25-0.48  mg 
iodine/day, which is within the range of iodine intake in 
the  US.    Women  in  their  control  group  were  asked  to 

(Continued on next page) 

115 

 
 
 
 
 
 
abstain from seaweed for a few days.  How convenient!  
In  the  mothers  who  supposedly  ingested  “excessive  io-
dine” from their diet, the amount of iodine ingested was 
5-10  times  lower  than  the  national  average  intake  by 
mainland  Japanese.2,3    Normal  thyroid  hormones  and 
TSH  were  observed  in  these  women.    All  15  infants 
from  these  mothers  had  normal  serum  free  T4  levels.  
The  physical  and  psychomotor  developments  of  the  15 
infants  were  normal.    After  centuries  of  consuming 
safely  large  amounts  of  iodine  from  seaweed,  why 
would  iodine  in  seaweed  suddenly  become  toxic  to 
mainland Japanese?  The data presented in Nishiyama’s 
publication do not justify the alarming implication of the 
title  of  that  publication.    The  expression  “excessive  io-
dine intake”  is  taken from  Wolff’s review.7   More  than 
50  years  after  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  forgery,  it  is  still 
quoted in iodophobic publications.   

Children  as  Victims:    Shortly  after  the  publication  on 
“excess iodine” in newborns,22 another publication in the 
American  Journal  of  Clinical  Nutrition23  reported  that 
urine  iodide  concentrations  greater  than  0.5  mg/L  was 
associated with increased thyroid volume in multiethnic 
groups of children between six and 12 years old.  Analy-
sis  of  the  data  in  Table  I  of  that  publication  revealed 
only  children  from  Hokkaido,  Japan  showed  increased 
thyroid  volumes  of  significance  compared  to  the  other 
groups:    2.16  to  2.59  ml  for  all  the  other  groups;  and 
2.86 and 4.91 ml for the 2 groups from Hokkaido.  This 
area  of  Japan  is  known  to  have  a  high  incidence  of 
euthyroid goiter.  Suzuki, et al9 first reported this finding 
in  1965  but  did  not  think  that  iodine  was  the  cause  of 
this goiter.  He commented:  “Considering the paucity of 
reported  cases  of  iodine  goiter  with  the  widespread  us-
age  of  iodine  medication,  we  cannot  exclude  factors 
other  than  excessive  intake  of  dietary  iodine  as  a cause 
of the goiter.” 

Diverting Attention from the 
Anticarcinogenic Effect of Iodine in Seaweed 
Based on an extensive review of breast cancer epidemi-
ological studies, R.A. Wiseman24 came to the following 
conclusions:    92-96%  of  breast  cancer  cases  are  spo-
radic;  there  is  a  single  cause  for  the  majority  of  cases; 
the causative agent is deficiency of a micronutrient that 
is depleted by a high fat diet; and if such an agent is de-
tected, intervention studies with supplementation should 
lead to a decline in the incidence of breast cancer.  It is 
the  opinion  of  several  investigators  that  this  protective 
micronutrient  is  the  essential  element  iodine.2    Demo-
graphic surveys of Japan and Iceland revealed that both 
countries have a relatively high intake of iodine and low 
incidences  of  simple  endemic  goiter  and  breast  cancer.  
Whereas  in  Mexico  and  Thailand,  just  the  reverse  is  ob-

served  —  a  high  incidence  of  both  endemic  goiter  and 
breast  cancer.25    Thomas,  et  al26,27  have  demonstrated  a 
significant and inverse correlation between iodine intake 
and  the  incidence  of  breast,  endometrial,  and  ovarian 
cancer  in  various  geographical  areas.    Thyroid  volume 
measured by ultrasonometry and expressed as ml is sig-
nificantly larger in Irish women with breast cancer than 
controls  with  mean  values  of  12.9±1.2  in  controls  and 
20.4±1.0  in  women  with  breast  cancer.28    Intervention 
studies in female rats by Eskin13-15 are very suggestive of 
a  facilitating  role  of  iodine  deficiency  on  the  carcino-
genic effect of estrogens and a protective role of iodine 
in maintaining normality of breast tissues.  The risk for 
breast cancer is higher in women with fibrocystic disease 
of the breast (FDB), and iodine supplementation is effec-
tive against FDB.2-4 

With  this  background  of  extensive  information  on  the 
beneficial roles of iodine in seaweed against breast can-
cer, one would expect that a publication dealing with the 
protective role of iodine-rich seaweed against breast can-
cer would mention iodine as a possible factor in the list 
of  bioactive  substances.    Here  comes  toxicologist  Ski-
bola,  from  U.C.  Berkeley,  the  birthplace  of  the  Wolff-
Chaikoff effect.  In the August 2004 issue of BMC Com-
plementary and Alternative Medicine,29  Skibola  reported 
the  effect  of  brown  seaweed  on  menstrual  cycle  length 
and  hormonal  status  in  three  pre-menopausal  women 
with  short  menstrual  cycles  and  prolonged  menstrual 
flow.  The seaweed was administered orally in a powder 
form  compounded  in  gelatin  capsules  (seaweed  supple-
ments).    In  all  three  women,  administration  of  seaweed 
resulted  in  a  prolongation  of  the  menstrual  cycle,  a  de-
crease in menstrual flow, a marked drop in serum estra-
diol 17-B levels, and a marked increase in serum proges-
terone.29    In  the  list  of  potential  substances  in  seaweed 
capable  of  eliciting  such  a  beneficial effect  on  the  ova-
ries,  iodine  was  not  mentioned  once.    In  fact,  the  word 
“iodine” was completely omitted in the publication.  The 
amount  of iodine in  the  seaweed  used in  her study  was 
not  reported.    In  a  subsequent  publication,  Skibola,  et 
al30  reproduced  in  female  rats  the  results  obtained  with 
seaweed in women.  Again they failed to mention iodine 
as  a  possible  factor  involved  in  the  results  obtained.  
These  results  reported  by  Skibola  demonstrate  a  dra-
matic effect of seaweed on the ovaries of these women, 
normalizing  ovarian  function.    The  element  iodine  was 
reported  by  Russian  scientists  40  years  ago  to  elicit  a 
similar effect in normalizing ovarian function in women 
with cystic ovaries.31 

Two  Russian  scientists31 published  in  1966 their  results 
regarding  the  effect  of  oral  administration  of  potassium 
(Continued on next page) 

116 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Fall   2005 

 
 
 
 
iodide in daily amounts equivalent to 10-20 mg elemen-
tal iodine, on 200 patients with “dyshormonal hyperpha-
sia of mammary glands.”  They postulated that this form 
of mastopathy was due to excess estrogens from ovarian 
follicular cysts which were caused by iodine deficiency.  
The duration of iodine supplementation of their patients 
varied  from  six  months  to  three  years.    Within  three 
months,  there  was  significant  reduction  of  swelling, 
pain, diffuse induration, and nodularity of the breast.  In 
five  patients  with  ovarian  follicular  cysts,  there  was  a 
regression of the cystic ovaries following five months to 
one  year  of  iodine  supplementation.    Ghent,  et  al32  ob-
tained  similar  results  in  FDB  treated  with  iodine.    We 
have observed similar responses to iodine supplementa-
tion  at  daily  amounts  of  50  mg  iodine  in  the  form  of 
Lugol  tablets  in  patients  with  polycystic  ovary  syn-
drome,  resulting  in  the  regularization  of  the  menstrual 
cycle.2  Why Skibola chose to completely ignore iodine 
in her publications remains a mystery.  Next to the thy-
oid  gland,  the  ovaries  contain  the  largest  concentration 
of iodine.33  A sodium iodide symporter is present in the 
ovaries.    This  ovarian  symporter  is  blocked  by  goitro-
gens.  There is overwhelming evidence that iodine is the 
active  ingredient  in  seaweed,  eliciting  the  effects  ob-
served by Skibola on the ovaries of women. 

Most  Internet  users  do  not  go  further  than  the  informa-
tion supplied on the Web.  Rarely do they search further 
in the original studies.  So, what is on the Net about Ski-
bola’s studies?  In an interview with Amy Norton,34 Ski-
bola did mention iodine as a potentially toxic substance:  
“‘Adding  seaweed  to  the  diet  is  probably  going  to  be 
beneficial,’  Skibola  said.  However,  she  offered  a  word 
of caution about the kelp supplements sold at health food 
stores.  Kelp contains high amounts of iodine, as well as 
low  levels  of  heavy  metals,  and  taking  the  seaweed  in 
supplement form makes it easier to get too much of these 
potentially toxic substances.  According to Skibola, kelp 
is  not  recommended  for  women  who  are  pregnant  or 
nursing, or for people with an overactive thyroid gland.” 

Here,  we  have  a  perfect  example  of  doublespeak.    Ski-
bola,  who  became  an  instant  expert  on  iodine,  advises 
against  kelp  supplements  sold  in  health  food  stores  be-
cause of the presence of the toxic substances iodine and 
heavy metals.  Yet, she used in her studies, seaweed sup-
plements made up of seaweed powder obtained from the 
same company that sells bulk seaweed powder to manu-
facturers  who  supply  seaweed  capsules  to  health  food 
stores.    Skibola  is  very  concerned  about  toxic  sub-
stances,  such  as  iodine  in  seaweed  from  health  food 
stores, but she never reported the levels of iodine present 
in the seaweed she used in her studies.  Is that a double 
standard?    Atlantic  seaweed  used  extensively  by  the 

health  food  industry  as  a  source  of  iodine,  contains  ap-
proximately  0.4%  iodine  (dry  weight),  that  is  4  mg  io-
dine/gm  seaweed.    In  her  studies  of  pre-menopausal 
women, she used a daily amount of 0.7-1.4 gm.  There-
fore,  the  daily  intake  of  iodine  in  her  study  subjects 
would be 2.8 mg to 5.6 mg/day.  That is the amount of 
iodine used by Ghent, et al32 to successfully treat FDB.  
Her  recommendations  to  pregnant  and  nursing  mothers 
to avoid seaweed, applies only to American women, not 
mainland  Japanese  women  who  regularly  consume  io-
dine  rich  seaweed  during pregnancy  and  lactation.   Ac-
cording to Skibola, people with overactive thyroid gland 
should  avoid  seaweed  because  of  the  toxic  element  io-
dine.  Remember the Wolff-Chaikoff effect?  You can’t 
be  too  careful.    Skibola  may  not  be  aware  that  prior  to 
the  Wolff-Chaikoff  publication,  US  physicians  used  io-
dine  in  Lugol  solution,  extensively,  safely,  and  effi-
ciently to treat overactive thyroid glands with as high as 
90% success rate.3  Even Wolff and Chaikoff quoted the 
successful use of iodine to treat hyperthyroidism in the dis-
cussion of their publication.1 

To wrap it up, proper amounts of iodine in the food sup-
ply  is  the  greatest  asset  of  a  nation.    Removing  iodine 
from the food supply is a form of domestic bioterrorism.  
Supplying  daily  intake  of  iodine  for  whole  body  suffi-
ciency  (100-400  times  the  RDA)  gives  protection2-4 
against goitrogens and radioactive iodine/iodide fall out; 
improves  immune  functions,  resulting  in  an  adequate 
defense system against infection; decreases singlet oxy-
gen  formation  which  is  the  major  cause  of  oxidative 
damage  to  DNA  and  macromolecules,  resulting  in  an 
anticarcinogenic  effect  in  every  organ  in  the  human 
body;  results  in  a  detoxifying  effect  by  increasing  uri-
nary  excretion  of  the  toxic  metals  lead,  mercury,  cad-
mium, and aluminum, as well as the goitrogens fluoride 
and  bromide;  normalizes  hormone  receptor  functions 
resulting in improved response to thyroid hormones both 
endogenous and exogenous; and results in better control 
of  blood  sugar  in  diabetic  patients;  stabilizes  cardiac 
rhythm,  obviating  the  need  for  the  toxic  sustained  re-
lease form of iodine, amiodarone; and normalizes blood 
pressure  without  medication  in  hypertensive  patients.  
Iodine deficiency is the major cause of cognitive impair-
ment,  worldwide.2    Therefore,  iodine  sufficiency  would 
result  in  optimal  cognitive  function.    A  properly  func-
tioning gray matter is the greatest asset of a nation, and 
the greatest weapon against iodophobic bioterrorism.   

The worst form of domestic bioterrorism is the dissemi-
nation of iodophobic misinformation in order to discour-
age the use of adequate amount of iodine for whole body 
sufficiency  (orthoiodosupplementation).2-4    Today,  the 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Fall   2005 

117 

 
 
 
 
public relies  heavily  on  the  Internet  for  health informa-
tion.  Rarely do they search for the original publications.  
Whoever  supplies  health  information  on  the  Internet 
controls the health of the Internet user.  Control of health 
information on the Internet by iodophobic bioterrorists is 
a real threat to a population who depends on this source 
of information to make health-related decisions.  Such a 
population  is  vulnerable  and  most  likely  will  end  up 
adopting iodophobic decisions to their detriment.  Once 
caught in the iodophobic Net, it becomes a vicious cycle, 
difficult to exit.   

Iodophobic  bioterrorism  can  be  prevented  through  edu-
cation  of  health  care  professionals  and  the  public  at 
large.  Remember that the easiest and most effective way 
to  destroy  a  nation  is  the  removal  of  iodine  from  the 
food supply.  Iodophobic bioterrorism is a real threat to 
our nation, and the enemies within our gates masquerade 
as guardians of our thyroid gland.  

About the Author 

Guy E. Abraham, MD, is a former Professor of Obstet-
rics,  Gynecology,  and  Endocrinology  at  the  UCLA 
School  of  Medicine.    Some  35  years  ago,  he  pioneered 
the development of assays to measure minute quantities 
of  steroid  hormones  in  biological  fluids.    He  has  been 
honored as follows:  General Diagnostic Award from the 
Canadian  Association  of  Clinical  Chemists,  1974;  the 
Medaille  d’Honneur  from  the  University  of  Liege,  Bel-
gium,  1976;  the  Senior  Investigator  Award  of  Phar-
macia,  Sweden,  1980.    The  applications  of  Dr.  Abra-
ham’s  techniques  to  a  variety  of  female  disorders  have 
brought  a  notable  improvement  to  the  understanding 
and  management  of  these  disorders.    Twenty-five  years 
ago,  Dr.  Abraham  developed  nutritional  programs  for 
women  with  premenstrual  tension  syndrome  and  post-
menopausal osteoporosis.  They are now the most com-
monly used dietary programs by American obstetricians 
and gynecologists.  Dr. Abraham’s current research in-
terests  include the  development  of  assays  for  the  meas-
urement  of  iodide  and  the  other  halides  in  biological 
fluids  and  their  applications  to  the  implementation  of 
orthoiodosupplementation in medical practice. 

REFERENCES 

1)  Wolff J and Chaikoff IL.  “Plasma inorganic iodide as a homeo-
static  regulator  of  thyroid  function.”    J  Biol  Chem,  1948; 
174:555-564. 

2)  A b r a h a m   G E ,  

J C .  
“Othoiodosupplementation:   Iodine  sufficiency  of  the  whole  hu-
man body.  The Original Internist, 2002; 9(4):30-41. 

J D ,   H a k a l a  

F l e c h a s  

3)  Abraham  GE.    “The  safe  and  effective  implementation  of  or-
thoiodosupplementation  in  medical  practice.”    The  Original  In-

ternist, 2004; 11(1):17-36. 

4)  Abraham GE.  “The concept of orthoiodosupplementation and its 
clinical implications.”  The Original Internist, 2004; 11(2):29-38. 
5)  Wartofsky L, Ransil BJ, and Ingbar SH.  “Inhibition by iodine of 
the release of thyroxine from the thyroid glands of patients with 
thyrotoxicosis.”  J Clin Invest, 1970; 49:78-86. 

6)  Gennaro  AR.    Remington:  The  Science  and  Practice  of  Phar-
macy.  19th edition.  Mace Publishing Co., 1995; 976, 1267. 
7)  Wolff J.  “Iodide goiter and the pharmacologic effects of excess 

iodide. Am J Med, 1969; 47:101-124. 

8)  Koutras DA, et al.  “Effect of small iodine supplements on thy-
roid  function  in  normal  individuals.”    J  Clin  Endocr,  1964; 
24:857-862. 

9)  Suzuki  H,  Higuchi  T,  Sawa  K,  et  al.    “Endemic  coast  goitre  in 

Hokkaido Japan.”  Acta Endocr, 1965; 50:161-176. 

10) Nagataki  S,  Shizume  K,  and  Nakao  K.    “Thyroid  function  in 
chronic  excess  iodide  ingestion:   Comparison  of  thyroidal  abso-
lute  iodine  uptake  and  degradation  of  thyraxine  in  euthyroid 
Japanese subjects.”  J Clin Endo, 1967; 27:68-647. 

11) Konno N, Makita H, Yuri K, et al.  “Association between dietary 
iodine intake and prevalence of subclinical hypothryoidism in the 
coastal regions of Japan.”  J Clin Endo Metab, 1994; 78:393-397. 
12) Stadel  B.    “Dietary  iodine  and  risk  of  breast,  endometrial,  and 

ovarian cancer.”  The Lancet, 1976; 1:890-891. 

13) Eskin B, Bartuska D, Dunn M, et al.  “Mammary gland dysplasia 

in iodine deficiency.”  JAMA, 1967; 200:115-119. 

14) Eskin  B.    “Iodine  metabolism  and  breast  cancer.”    Trans  New 

York Acad Of Sciences, 1970; 32:911-947. 

15) Eskin  B.    “Iodine  and  mammary  cancer.”    Adv  Exp  Med  Biol, 

1977; 91:293-304. 

16) Eskin B.  Personal communication. 
17) Abraham  GE,  Flechas  JD,  and  Hakala  JC.    “Optimum  levels  of 
iodine  for  greatest  mental  and  physical  health.”    The  Original 
Internist, 2002; 9(3):5-20. 

18) Abraham  GE.    “Iodine  supplementation  markedly  increases  uri-
nary excretion of fluoride and bromide.”  Townsend Letter, 2003; 
238:108-109. 

19) Abraham  GE.    “Serum  inorganic  iodide  levels  following  inges-
tion  of  a  tablet  form  of  Lugol  solution:  Evidence  for  an  entero-
hepatic  circulation  of  iodine.”    The  Original  Internist,  2004; 
11(3):29-34. 

20) Abraham  GE,  Flechas  JD,  and  Hakala  JC.    “Measurement  of 
urinary iodide levels by ion-selective electrode:  Improved sensi-
tivity  and  specificity  by  chromatography  on  anion-exchange 
resin.”  The Original Internist, 2004; 11(4):19-32. 

21) Konno  N,  Yuri  K,  Miura  K,  et  al.    “Clinical  evaluation  of  the 
iodide/creatinine  ratio  of  casual  urine  samples  as  an  index  of 
daily iodide excretion in a population study.”  Endocrine Journal, 
1993; 40(1):163-169.   

22) Nishiyama S, et al.  “Transient hypothyroidism or persistent hy-
perthyrotropinemia  in  neonates  born  to  mothers  with  excessive 
iodine intake.”  Thyroid, 2004; 14(12):1077-1083. 

23) Zimmermann MB, et al.  “High thyroid volume in children with 
excess  dietary  iodine  intakes.”    Am  J  Clin  Nutr,  2005;  81:840-
844. 

24) Wiseman  R.    “Breast  cancer  hypothesis:  a  single  cause  for  the 
majority of cases.”  J Epid Comm Health, 2000; 54:851-858. 
25) Finley  JW  and  Bogardus  GM.    “Breast  cancer  and  thyroid  dis-

ease.”  Quart Rev Surg Obstet Gynec, 1960; 17:139-147. 

26) Thomas BS, Bulbrook RD, Russell MJ, et al.  “Thyroid function 
in  early  breast  cancer.”    Europ  J  Cancer  Clin  Oncol,  1983; 
19:1213-1219. 

27) Thomas BS, Bulbrook RD, and Goodman MJ.  “Thyroid function 
and  the  incidence  of  breast cancer in Hawaiian, British, and Japa-
nese women.”  Int J Cancer, 1986; 38:325-329. 

28) Smyth P.  “Thyroid disease and breast cancer.”  J Endo Int, 1993; 

118 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Fall   2005