The Historical 
Background of the 
Iodine Project 

by Guy E. Abraham, MD 

The goal of this article is to provide the background on 
the Iodine Project which started five years ago and reac-
quaint  the  reader  with  the  concept  of  orthoiodosupple-
mentation  —  the  amount  of  iodine  required  for  whole 
body  sufficiency  based  on  an  iodine/iodide  loading  test 
recently developed by the author.1 

During the first half of the 20th century, almost every US 
physician  used  Lugol  solution  for  iodine  supplementa-
tion in his/her practice for both hypo- and hyperthyroid-
ism,1 and for many other medical conditions.2  In the old 
pharmacopeias,  Lugol  solution  was  called  Liquor  Iodi 
Compositus.  The minimum dose, called minim, was one 
drop containing 6.25 mg of elemental iodine, with 40% 
iodine  and  60%  iodide  as  the  potassium  salt.    The  rec-
ommended  daily  intake  for  iodine  supplementation  was 
2-6  minims  (drops)  containing  12.5-37.5  mg  elemental 
iodine.  During the second half of the 20th century, iodo-
phobic  misinformation,  disseminated  progressively  and 
deceitfully  among  the  medical  profession,  resulted  in  a 
decreased  use  of  Lugol,  with iodized  salt  becoming  the 
standard  for  iodine  supplementation.1    The  bioavailable 
iodide  from  iodized  salt  is  only  10%,  and  the  daily 
amount of iodide absorbed from iodized salt is 200-500 
times  less  than  the  amount  of  iodine/iodide  previously 
recommended  by  US  physicians.    After  World  War  II, 
US  physicians  were  educated  early  in  their  medical  ca-
reer  to  believe  that  inorganic,  non-radioactive  forms  of 
iodine  were  toxic.    Adverse  reactions  to  radiographic 
contrast  media  and  other  iodine-containing  drugs  were 
blamed on iodine.  If a patient told his/her physician that 
he/she could not tolerate seafood, the physician told him/
her that he/she was allergic to iodine.   

toxic,  whereas 

Several forms of iodine prescribed by US physicians are 
listed in Table 1.  The manmade organic forms of iodine 
are  extremely 
inorganic  non-
radioactive  forms  are  extremely  safe.1    However,  the 
safe,  inorganic,  non-radioactive  forms  were  blamed  for 
the  severe  side  effects  of  the  organic  iodine-containing 
drugs.    A  new  syndrome,  medical  iodophobia,  was  re-
cently reported1 with symptoms of split personality, dou-

the 

ble  standards,  amnesia,  confusion  and  altered  state  of 
consciousness.    Medical  iodophobia  has  reached  pan-
demic proportion, and it is highly contagious (iatrogenic 
iodophobia).    A  century  ago,  non-radioactive  forms  of 
inorganic  iodine  were  considered  a  panacea  for  all  hu-
man ills,2 but today, they are avoided by physicians like 
leprosy.  Who or what killed iodine? 

The first nail in the iodine coffin was the publication by 
Wolff and Chaikoff from UC Berkley in 1948,3 describ-
ing their finding in rats administered iodide in increasing 
amounts by intraperitoneal injection.  When serum inor-
ganic iodide levels reached 0.2  mg/L, that is 10-6M, ra-
dioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland became undetect-
able.    The  correct  interpretation  would  be:  that  iodide 
sufficiency  of  the thyroid gland  was  achieved  when se-
rum  inorganic  iodide  levels  reach  10-6M,  as  we  previ-
ously  discussed.4    But  Wolff  and  Chaikoff  concluded 
that serum inorganic iodide levels at a concentration of 
10-6M  blocks  the synthesis  of thyroid  hormones,  result-
ing in hypothyroidism and goiter.  These authors did not 
measure thyroid hormones in the rats studied.  Hypothy-
roidism and goiter were not observed in those rats.  This 
fictitious  phenomenon  became  known  as  the  Wolff-
Chaikoff effect.5  Because these law-abiding rats refused 
to  become  hypothyroid  and  instead  followed  their  nor-
mal physiological response to the iodide load, they were 
unjustly accused of escaping from the law of the Wolff-
Chaikoff effect.  Labeling these innocent rats as fugitives 
was a great injustice against these rodents. 

The second and final nail in the iodine coffin was ham-
mered  in  by  Dr.  Wolff  in  1969.5    By  1969,  Wolff  had 
moved to the National Institute of Health from UC Berk-
ley.  Wolff arbitrarily defined four levels of “iodine ex-
cess.”  The first level of excess started with intake above 
0.2 mg/day, and iodide intake of 2 mg or more was con-
sidered “excessive and potentially harmful.”   In the next 
issue  of  this  journal,  this  author  discusses  the  Wolff-
Chaikoff  effect  and  presents  evidence  that  the  data  re-
ported in the rats by Wolff and Chaikoff3 did not justify 
the  interpretation  of  these  data  as  applied  to  rats.    Even 
worse,  extrapolation  of  these  findings  to  human  subjects 
by  Wolff5  was  inappropriate,  and  unscientific.    By  the 
1970s,  physicians  concluded  that  one  must  avoid  inor-
ganic, non-radioactive iodine like leprosy, unless it was 
incorporated  into  the  toxic,  organic  iodine-containing 
drugs.    Then  iodine  could  be  tolerated  because  iodine 
could be blamed for the toxicity of these drugs.   

Against this background, a 1993 publication by Ghent, et 
al,6  reported  the  beneficial  effects  of  5  mg  iodine  in-
gested daily for approximately one year in 1,368 patients 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Summer   2005 

57 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1 

Various Forms of Iodine/Iodide Used in 
Clinical Medicine and Their Toxicity Levels 

FORMS 

TOXICITY 

C
I
N
A
G
R
O
N
I

C
I
N
A
G
R
O

1) Non-radioactive 
    A) Iodides (i.e., SSKI) 
    B) Tincture of iodine 
    C) Lugol solution 

2) Radioactive iodides for 
    diagnostic and therapeutic 
    purposes 

1) Naturally occurring 
    A) Thyroid hormones 
    B) Thyroidal iodolipids 

2) Man-made 
    A) Radiographic contrast 
         media 
    B) Iodine-containing drugs 
         (i.e., amiodarone) 

Extremely safe 

Carcinogenic, 
Cytotoxic 

Safe within 
physiologic 
ranges 

Extremely toxic 

with fibrocystic disease of the breast (FDB).  This author 
became aware of Ghent’s publication in 1997.  Ghent’s 
study  did  not  confirm  Wolff’s  prediction  that  daily  io-
dine intake of 2,000 µg (2  mg) was “excessive and po-
tentially  harmful.”    Based  on  academic  credentials  and 
reputation, the opinion of thyroidologist Wolff from the 
National Institute of Health, would prevail over the find-
ings of Ghent, et al.  However, being interested in facts 
only, not in preconceived opinions of famous thyroidolo-
gists,  an  extensive  search  of  the  literature  on  iodine  in 
medicine  was  initiated  seven  years  ago  by  the  author, 
combined with some original clinical research.   

The  literature  search  revealed  that  60  million  mainland 
Japanese consume a daily average of 13.8 mg of elemen-
tal iodine, and Japan is one of the healthiest nations, based 
on  overall  well-being  and  cancer  statistics.4    Japanese 
women do not stop consuming iodine-rich foods during 
pregnancy, and Japanese fetuses are exposed to maternal 
peripheral levels of iodide at concentrations of 10-5M to 
10-6M.1,4    Either  the  Japanese  are  mutants,  capable  of 
thriving  on  toxic  levels  of  iodine  or  we  have  been 
grossly deceived, and the human body needs at least 100 
times  the  RDA,  which  was  established  very  recently  in 
1980 and confirmed in 1989!7 

The  literature  search  also  revealed  that  US  physicians 
over the past century used Lugol solution extensively in 
their practice for both hypo- and hyperthyroidism.1  The 
recommended daily amount for iodine supplementation, 

as previously mentioned, was from 2-6 drops containing 
12.5-37.5 mg elemental iodine with 40% iodine and 60% 
iodide as the potassium salt.  As late as 1995, it was still 
the recommended amount in the 19th Edition of Reming-
ton’s Science and Practice of Pharmacy.  For hyperthy-
roidism,  physicians  then  used  Lugol  solution  in  daily 
amounts  ranging  from  6-180  mg,  with  the  most  common 
dose of 90 mg resulting in success rates as high as 90%.1  
Radioiodide and goitrogens called antithyroid drugs were 
not  available  to  US  physicians  until  the  late  1940s,  after 
World War II.   

With the advent of radioiodide and goitrogens as alterna-
tives to Lugol solution in patients with hyperthyroidism, 
thyroidologists  became  very  destructive,  causing  hypo-
thyroidism in 90% of these unfortunate patients.1  It is of 
interest to mention that both radioiodide and goitrogens 
were introduced by the same group of investigators as a 
replacement  to  Lugol  in  the  treatment  of  hyperthyroid-
ism,  at  about  the  same  time  iodophobic  misinformation 
started appearing in the medical literature again authored 
by the same investigators.1  How strange!   

Thyroidologists suffer from selective iodophobia for the 
inorganic,  non-radioactive  forms  of  iodine  combined 
with  paradoxical  iodophylia  for  radioactive  iodide  and 
the toxic, organic iodine-containing drugs.  As an exam-
ple,  some  thyroidologists  recommend  radioiodide  abla-
tion of the thyroid gland in order to allow the reintroduc-
tion of the organic iodine-containing drug amiodarone in 
patients with a prior history of amiodarone-induced thy-
rotoxicosis.8    Amiodarone  is  a  toxic  form  of  sustained-
release iodine.  The author has previously discussed the 
interesting observation that this antiarrhythmic drug be-
comes  effective  when  the  body  has  accumulated  ap-
proximately 1.5 g of iodine.8  This is exactly the amount 
of iodine retained by the human body when iodine suffi-
ciency is achieved following orthoiodosupplementation.7  
Whole  body  sufficiency  for  inorganic,  non-radioactive 
iodine/iodide results in optimal cardiac functions.  Inor-
ganic, non-radioactive iodine was never tested in clinical 
conditions  for  which  physicians  prescribe  amiodarone.  
However, inorganic iodide is blamed for the severe side 
effects of this drug.  Unbelievable, but true! 

A review of the iodine literature revealed that British phy-
sicians  recommended  a  similar  range  of  daily  intake  of 
iodine  in  the  form  of  hydrogen  iodide  as  the  ranges  of 
iodine  recommended  by  US  physicians  in  the  form  of 
Lugol solution.  The recommended daily intake of hydri-
odic  acid  syrup  was  2-4  ml.9    The  syrup  is  prepared by 
the  British  apothecary  from  a  stock  solution  containing 
10%  hydrogen  iodide  (HI),  which  is  diluted  10-fold  with 
(Continued on next page) 

58 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Summer   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
syrups of different flavors.  The syrup would contain 1% 
hydrogen  iodide.    This  would  compute  to  10  mg  iodide 
per ml.  So, the recommended daily amount of elemental 
iodine was 20-40 mg. 

After  overcoming  the  delusion  that  inorganic,  non-
radioactive  forms  of  iodine  are  toxic  and  becoming 
aware that the inorganic, non-radioactive forms of iodine 
were extremely safe and used extensively by US physi-
cians  for  many  medical  conditions,  the  author  initiated 
the Iodine Project.  Clinical studies were performed five 
years  ago  to  confirm  Ghent’s  findings,6  combined  with 
some  original  research.    The  clinical  aspects  of  this  re-
search  were  performed  under  contract  at  the  Flechas 
Family  Practice  Clinic  in  Hendersonville,  North  Caro-
lina under the supervision of Jorge D. Flechas, MD, and 
funded with grants from Optimox Corporation.  The au-
thor  designed  the  protocols  and  monitored  the  progress 
and  completion  of  each  project.    Informed  consent  was 
obtained from all subjects participating in these projects. 

Because administration of iodine in liquid solution is not 
very  accurate,  may  stain  clothing,  has  an  unpleasant 
taste,  and  causes  gastric  irritation,  we  decided  to  use  a 
precisely  quantified  tablet  form  of  Lugol.    To  prevent 
gastric  irritation,  the  iodine/iodide  preparation  was  ab-
sorbed unto a colloidal silica excipient; to eliminate the 
unpleasant taste of iodine, the tablets were coated with a 
thin film of pharmaceutical glaze.  John C. Hakala from 
Hakala  Apothecaries,  in  Lakewood,  Colorado,  com-
pounded the tablets.10 

To confirm the safety of the Lugol tablets, pilot studies 
were  performed  with  tablets  of  Lugol  containing  1.0-
12.5  mg  of  elemental  iodine.    Following  the pilot stud-
ies, 10 female subjects, seven with breast symptomatol-
ogy, were studied for three months at 12.5 mg/day.  Pre- 
and post-supplementation evaluation of blood chemistry, 
hematology,  thyroid  function  tests,  and  ultrasonometry 
of  the  thyroid  gland  were  performed.    The  results  ob-
tained  in  these  female  subjects  using  a  tablet  form  of 
Lugol  solution  (Iodoral®,  Optimox  Corporation,  Tor-
rance,  CA) at  12.5  mg/day  for  three months confirmed 
Ghent’s observations, and the safety of the Lugol tablets.  
This was reported in The Original Internist in 2002.10 

In order to build a database that could be used to develop 
a protocol for the implementation of iodine supplemen-
tation in FDB and other clinical conditions, a long-term 
study of Lugol tablets in female patients with FDB, us-
ing Ghent’s scoring of FDB, was initiated four years ago 
at Dr. Flechas’ clinic, supported by grants from Optimox 
Corporation.  Dr. Flechas will present a preliminary re-
port  of  his  results  on  the  use  of  Lugol  tablets  in  FDB, 

using daily amounts of 12.5-50.0 mg of elemental iodine 
(See  page  89).    In  2003,  Dr.  David  Brownstein  joined 
the  Iodine  Project  and  became  a  very  efficient  spokes-
man  for  the  orthoiodosupplementation  program.    He 
wrote  a  booklet  published  in  2004,11  describing  his  ex-
periences with this approach in his practice.  Dr. Brown-
stein was invited to outline some  key recommendations 
for the benefit of other health care practitioners based on 
his and his partners’ experience so far in 3,000 patients.  
His article will be in next month’s issue. 

Five years ago, urine samples were sent to local laborato-
ries for the measurement of iodide levels before and after 
orthoiodosupplementation.    The  iodophobic  mentality 
became evident immediately.  The reports came back with 
statements like “Greater than 500 µg iodide/24 hr., check 
for contamination.”  The author then switched to a large 
commercial  laboratory  catering  to  some  30,000  health 
care practitioners.  The normal range of urine iodide lev-
els for that laboratory was: 0.02-0.50 mg/24 hr.  Together 
with  urine  iodide  levels,  this  laboratory  also  performed 
urine levels of minerals, trace elements, and toxic metals.   

The bioavailability of a Lugol tablet (Iodoral®) contain-
ing 12.5 mg elemental iodine was evaluated by measur-
ing 24-hour urine levels of iodide together with the min-
erals,  trace  elements,  and  toxic  metals  before  and  after 
administration of this preparation.  The results obtained 
following  iodine  supplementation  revealed  that  in  some 
subjects, the urine levels of mercury, lead, and cadmium 
increased by  several times  after just  one  day  of supple-
mentation.  For aluminum, this increased excretion was 
not  observed  usually  until  after  one  month  or  more  on 
the iodine supplementation. 

Based on data available in the medical literature, urinary 
iodide levels are considered the best index of iodine in-
take.12    The  initial  results  of  the  bioavailability  study 
suggested that the Lugol tablets were not well absorbed 
since only 20-30% of the administered amount was re-
covered in the 24-hour urine collection of five subjects 
tested.12  Just in case medical textbooks were wrong, and 
the  explanation  for  the  low  recovery  of  iodide  is  body 
retention of iodine/iodide, the supplementation was con-
tinued  for  one  month  and  then  urine  iodide levels  were 
measured again in the 24-hour urine collection.  Medical 
textbooks were wrong.  The subjects excreted a mean of 
50% of the amount ingested, with one subject excreting 
96% of the ingested amount.12 

The implication of such observation was that an iodine/
iodide-loading test could be developed to assess not just 
thyroid  sufficiency  for  iodine  but  requirement  of  the 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Summer   2005 

59 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 

Effect of Increasing Intake of 
Iodine/Iodide on Percentage Urinary 
Excretion of Ingested Amounts 

d
e
t
e
r
c
x
e

e
s
o
d

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
n
a
e

M

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
l
o
c

e
n
i
r
u

r
u
o
h
-
4
2
n
i

Mean     SD

(    ) = Range

(14.2-66)

(14-37)

(22-25)

(20-26)

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1

2

3

4

Quantity of Iodoral® tablets used in loading test 
(From Abraham reference 1) 

whole human body for that essential element.  However, 
instead of a one-month loading test, further studies were 
performed to shorten this test to a single ingestion of the 
preparation.  Another group of six subjects, (three male 
and  three  female)  were  evaluated  with  24-hour  urinary 
iodide  levels  after  ingesting  one,  two,  and  three  tablets 
of  the  same  preparation.    The  mean  percentage  excre-
tions (± SD) were 22±1.2% for one tablet, 23±2.8% for 
two tablets, and 25±12.3% for three tablets.  In a third 
group of six subjects, urine iodide levels were evaluated 
following  four  tablets  of  the  same  preparation.    The 
mean  pecentage  excretion  was  39±17.2%.  (See  Figure 
1.)  For the loading test, a single ingestion of four tablets 
was  chosen,  because  this  dose  resulted  in  the  highest 
mean percentage iodide excreted with the widest interin-
dividual variations.   

Because of the improved overall well-being reported by 
the subjects who achieved 90% or more iodide excreted, 
sufficiency  was  arbitrarily  set  as  90%.    Implementation 
of  orthoiodosupplementation  based  on  the  loading  test 
revealed that sufficiency was not achieved in some sub-
jects even after two years of iodine supplementation at 1-
2 tablets/day.  To achieve sufficiency within three months, 
most subjects required 3-4 tablets/day (37.5-50.0 mg), and 
some obese and diabetic subjects required even more than 
50 mg/day to achieve and maintain sufficiency. 

Six normal subjects with normal body weight (three men 
and  three  women)  ingested  four  tablets  of  Iodoral® 
(50mg)/day  for  three  months  and  were  followed  with 
monthly loading tests.  After three months on orthoiodo-
supplementation,  only  one  female  subject  did  not  reach 
sufficiency.  Following one month off orthoiodosupple-

mentation,  the  loading  test  was  repeated.    All  six  sub-
jects showed a significant drop of the iodide concentra-
tion in the 24-hour urine collection.  In all five subjects 
who had reached sufficiency, the percentage of the oral 
amount excreted in the 24-hour urine collection was be-
low  90%, ranging  from  64-82%.    This  drop in  percent-
age  excretion  has  been  observed  in  some  subjects  after 
they  have  achieved  whole  body  sufficiency  for  iodine, 
even  though  they  continued  to  ingest  50  mg  iodine/day 
regularly.  Increased exposure to goitrogens may be the 
explanation.  In some of these cases, the author has ob-
served increased urine bromide excretion as high as 20-
fold baseline levels following the loading test, concomi-
tant with a drop in percentage iodide excreted. 

Whole  body  sufficiency  for  iodine  correlated  well  with 
overall  well-being,  and  some  subjects  could  tell  when 
they  achieved  sufficiency  even  before  knowing  the  re-
sults of the test.  Iodine sufficiency was associated with 
a sense of overall well-being, lifting of a brain fog, feel-
ing  warmer  in  cold  environments,  increased  energy, 
needing  less  sleep,  achieving  more  in less time,  experi-
encing  regular  bowel  movements  and  improved  skin 
complexion.    In  some  subjects  with overweight  or  obe-
sity,  orthoiodosupplementation  resulted  in  weight  loss, 
decreased  percentage  body  fat  and  increased  muscle 
mass.    Following  orthoiodosupplementation,  increased 
urinary excretion of the goitrogens fluoride and bromide 
and  the  toxic  metals  mercury,  lead,  cadium,  and  alumi-
num  was  observed;  marked  improvement  of  fibrocystic 
disease of the breast occurred following three months of 
iodine  supplementation  at 50  mg/day.    In  three  patients 
with  polycystic  ovary  syndrome  with  olygomenorrhea, 
orthoiodosupplementation  resulted  in  regularization  of 
the  menstrual  cycle.    In  patients  on  thyroid  hormones, 
orthoiodosupplementation  resulted  in  a  decreased  re-
quirement  to  much  lower  levels  of  thyroxine  and  in 
some  cases,  resulted  in  the  complete  discontinuation  of 
this  hormone.    This  decreased  requirement  for  thyroid 
hormones  following  orthoiodosupplementation  was  ob-
served in a female patient with total thyroidectomy, sug-
gesting  that  iodine  not  only  improves  thyroid  function 
but  also  has  an  effect  at  the  target  organ  level.    In  dia-
betic  patients  on  insulin,  orthoiodosupplementation  re-
sulted  in  better  control  of  this  condition,  and  in  some 
cases alleviated this condition without the need for insu-
lin.    In  hypertensive  patients,  whole  body  iodine  suffi-
ciency resulted in normalization of blood pressure with-
out medications.  Similar observations were reported by 
other  physicians  using  this  program.    Best  results  were 
achieved when orthoiodosupplementation was combined 
with  a  complete  nutritional  program  emphasizing  mag-
nesium instead of calcium.1  The occurrence of side ef-
(Continued on next page) 

60 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Summer   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
fects  was  rare  and  this  topic  will  be  discussed  by  Drs. 
Flechas  and  Brownstein  in  other  articles.    The  Wolff-
Chaikoff effect was not observed in some 4,000 patients 
on  orthoiodosupplementation  for  as  long  as  three  years 
with daily intake ranging from 12.5-50.0 mg.  This is the 
combined experience of Drs. Flechas and Brownstein.   

The serum level of inorganic iodide supposedly causing 
hypothyroidism  and  simple  goiter  by  the  Wolff-
Chaikoff effect is 0.2 mg/L.3  The author previously cal-
culated  that  in  an  adult,  this  level  would  be  achieved 
with  a  daily  ingestion  of  12.5  mg  elemental  iodine.1  
Since this amount of Lugol solution was used safely by 
three  generations  of  US  physicians  for  iodine  supple-
mentation, and since we have observed that patients re-
ported optimal mental and physical performances on 3-4 
times that amount, we would like to propose a redefini-
tion of the Wolff-Chaikoff effect as optimal mental and 
physical performances.  This seems to be the most con-
genial  solution  to  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  forgery.    In  this 
way, the names of Wolff and Chaikoff would continue to 
be  mentioned  in  the  medical  literature,  but  associated 
with  the  real  and  pleasant  outcome  of  orthoiodosupple-
mentation, that is optimal mental and physical perform-
ances,  not  the  gloomy,  fictitious  outcome  proposed  by 
Wolff,5 that is goiter and hypothyroidism. 

Three years ago, the author decided to set up the iodide 
assay in situ, using the ion-selective electrode procedure.  
To  improve  specificity,  chromatography  separation  of 
the  halides  was  performed  on  anion-exchange  resins.12  
Halides  and  other  substances  interfered  in  the  assay  of 
iodide (Table 2).  One full year was required to optimize 
the  assay  for iodide.    In  January  2003,  Dr.  Flechas  and 
John C. Hakala were invited as guests of Optimox Cor-
poration to attend a two-day workshop in order to learn 
this technology.  Dr. Flechas quickly learned this proce-

Table 2 

dure and set it up in his own clinical laboratory.  At first, 
the loading test was performed on his patients only, but 
eventually, he made this service available to other clini-
cians.    Packets  containing  four tablets  of  Iodoral®  were 
made available for the loading test.  In another article in 
this  issue,  Dr.  Flechas  will  present  the  results  of  the 
loading  tests  he  gathered  during  the  previous two  years 
and  his  experience  with  the  implementation  of  orthoio-
dosupplementation in his practice. 

In order to test the reliability of commercial laboratories 
in  the  performance  of  urine  iodide  assay  at  the  levels 
observed  following  the  loading  test,  Optimox  Corpora-
tion  financed  a  pilot  study  on  five  subjects  who  under-
went  the  loading  test.    Samples  were  sent  to  two  com-
mercial  laboratories  for  iodide  measurement.    These 
laboratories  used  the  ICP-MS  method.    The  same  sam-
ples were also measured by the author in situ (Table 3).  
Lab #1 consistently underestimated and Lab #2 consis-
tently  overestimated  the  levels  measured  in  the potenti-
ometric  laboratory  of  the  author.    Physicians  using  the 
iodine/iodide loading test to follow their patients on or-
thoiodosupplementation  will  depend  on  the  results  of 
these  tests  for  evaluation  of  whole  body  iodine  suffi-
ciency  and  clinical  response.    Therefore,  the  measure-
ment of urine iodide levels must be accurate at concen-
trations two orders of magnitude greater than the normal 
range of these laboratories, that is 0.02-0.50 mg/24 hr.   

The  supervisor  of  Lab  #1  was  contacted.    He  was  very 
helpful and explained that his equipment was calibrated 
to  measure  the  range  of  urine  iodide  levels  expected  in 
the US population, that is 0.02-0.50 mg/24 hr, and there-
fore, it would not be reliable at levels 100 times higher.  
He  performed  recovery  experiments  and  confirmed  that 
his  equipment  underestimated  the  true  value  by  50% 
(Continued on next page) 

Interferences in the Ion-Selective Electrode Assay of Halides and 
Procedures for Preventing These Interferences 

Halides 

Interferences* 

Procedures for preventing interference 

Chloride 

Fluoride 

Bromide 

Iodide 

OH- = 80 
Br- = 3 x 10-3 
I- = 5 x 10-7 

OH- 

OH- = 3 x 104 
Cl- = 400 
I- = 2 x 10-4 

Cl- = 10-6 
Br- = 5 x 103 

1)  Acidification 
2)  Chromatographic separation from other halides 

Acidification with Orion spcial ISA:  TISAB, added to urine samples at equal volumes 

Chromatographic separation from other halides 

Chromatographic separation from other halides 

* The maximum allowable concentrations of interfering substances express as the molar ratio of the interfering ion concentration to the 
sample halide concentration.  If the ratio is exceeded, the data generated by electrode will become unreliable.  Information supplied by 
Thermo Orion Corporation. 

 
 
 
 
within the range of iodide levels expected for the loading 
test.  He showed great interest in offering this service to 
his clients, and the author supplied him with the details 
of the technique using ion-selective electrode, following 
chromatography on strong anion exchangers. 

The  chromatographic  system  was  modified  in  order  to 
measure accurately the other halides:  chloride, fluoride, 
and  bromide,  using  a  positive  displacement  manifold 
designed by the author.8  The flowchart for this chroma-
tographic separation is displayed in Figure 2.  Compari-
son of results obtained before and after chromatographic 
purification  of  the  halides  chloride,  fluoride,  bromide, 
and iodide revealed the following.  In 24 urine samples 
analyzed,  the  values  obtained  for  chloride  and  fluoride 
by the direct assay, using Thermo Orion reagents and the 
values  obtained  after  chromatography  were  not  signifi-
cantly  different.    However,  for  bromide  and  iodide,  the 
direct  assay  overestimated  significantly  the  values  ob-
tained following chromatography.  For iodide, the direct 
assay overestimated by two-fold on the average, the lev-
els obtained following chromatography in urine samples 
obtained  prior  to  iodine  supplementation.    Even  after 
iodine supplementation, significant differences were ob-
served in the iodide levels of some samples measured by 
these  two  procedures.    It  was  decided  to  perform  chro-
matography  on  all  samples  prior  to  analysis  by  the  io-

Figure 2 

dide-selective  electrode,  no  matter  the  expected  iodide 
levels.   

Orthoiodosupplementation  resulted  in  marked  increase 
in  bromide  excretion,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  fluoride 
also.  The results obtained in the first five subjects stud-
ied  are  displayed  in  Table  4.    The  results  observed  for 
bromide in subject #5 were so surprising that they were 
published as a letter to the editor of Townsend  Letter.13  
These  findings  have  since  been  replicated  in  a  large 
number  of  tests.    Female  patients  with  breast  cancer 
seem to retain more iodine on the loading test than nor-
mal subjects and excrete more bromide than normal sub-
jects.  This needs to be confirmed using a well-designed 
protocol  since  this  observation  is  anecdotal  on  a  small 
number of patients.   

Recently, the author extended the ion-selective electrode 
assay to serum samples.8  Evidence for an enterohepatic 
circulation of inorganic iodine was observed for the first 
time.    Serum  iodide  levels  reached  peak  values  of  1.5-
2.2 mg/L between two and four hours post ingestion of 
Iodoral®  in  subjects  ingesting  3-4  tab/day.    A  second 
peak of serum iodide after eight hours following the first 
peak was observed in some subjects suggesting that se-
rum  iodide  undergoes  an  enterohepatic circulation.    Se-
(Continued on next page) 

Flowchart Describing the Combined Measurement of Chloride, Fluoride, Bromide, and 
Iodide in the Same Urine  or Serum Sample by Prior Chromatography on Anion-Exchange Resin 
Cartridges Fitted with the 10 ml Plastic Syringes in a Positive Displacement Manifold (PMD).11 

IN

Sample
10 ml of
urine/serum

SEQUENCE
OF ELUTION

1

10 ml of
0.05N NaNO 3

2

10 ml of
0.1N NaNO 3

3

S      A  X 

c 

SAX column 
o 

l 
Altech #21907 600 mg

u  m 

10 ml of
5N NaNO 3

4

n

HALIDES
ELUTED

- Chloride

In 10 ml
of urine/ 
serum

- Fluoride

In 10 ml of
0.05N NaNO 3

- Bromide

In 10 ml of
0.1N NaNO 3

- Iodide

In 10 ml of
5N NaNO 3

++++

++++

++++

++++

5 ml of 5N NaNO 3

10 ml of TISAB

5 ml of 5N NaNO 3

20 ml H 2O

ISE assay
of chloride

ISE assay
of fluoride

ISE assay
of bromide

ISE assay
of iodide

ORION
ELECTRODE #

#9617 BN

#9609 BN

#9635 BN

#9653 BN

 
 
 
Iodide Levels Measured in 24-hour Urine 
Collections of 5 Subjects Following the 
Iodine/Iodide Loading Test:  A Comparison of Results 
Obtained from 3 Different Laboratories 

Commercial 
Lab 1 
(mg/24h) 

Commercial 
Lab 2 
(mg/24h) 

rum iodide levels were still elevated 24 hours after the 
loading dose, ranging from 0.3-0.6 mg/L.3,7 

In order to assess the presence of iodine and iodate (the 
oxidized  forms)  in  serum  following  orthoiodosupple-
mentation, serum iodide levels (the reduced form) were 
measured  by  ion-selective  electrode  before  and  after 
reduction  with  sodium  metabisulfate.    The  three  inor-
ganic forms of the element iodine consumed by human 
subjects are 1) the negatively charged reduced iodide; 2) 
the negatively charged highly oxidized iodate IO-
3; and 
3)  the  neutral  oxidized  iodine  I2.    The  iodide  selective 
electrode  is  influenced  only  by  negatively  charged 
forms of this element, that is, iodide I- and iodate IO-
3.  
Experiments performed by 
the  author  with  sodium 
iodate  revealed  that  the 
iodate  molecule,  because 
it is larger in size than io-
dide, did not have any ap-
preciable  effect  on 
the 
electromotive force (EMF) 
of  the  electrode,  even  at 
10,000 
concentrations 
times  higher 
the 
amount of iodide influenc-
ing  significantly  the  EMF 
of the selective electrode.   

Subject  Sex 

 Table 3 

than 

F 

F 

12.0 

14.0 

2 

1 

3 

M 

7.0 

11.0 

12.0 

5 

4 

M 

M 

Pilot  studies  were  per-
formed  in  order  to  quan-
tify  the  amount  of  the  re-
ductant  needed  for  the  re-
duction  of  iodine  and  io-
date to iodide.  Almost 10 
times  more  reductant  was 
required  for  the  reduction 
of iodate to iodide than iodine to iodide.  The reduction 
of  iodate  resulted  in  the  formation  of  iodine  first,  then 
iodide.  When this procedure was applied to urine sam-
ples,  no  significant  difference  was  observed  between 
pre-  and  post-reduction  levels,  suggesting  that  only  io-
dide, the reduced form, was present in urine.  However, 
serial  serum  samples  obtained  for  24  hours  following 
the  loading  test,  showed  a  significant  difference  in  the 
serum iodide levels between pre- and post-reduced sam-
ples within the first two hours in a female subject, with 
post-reduction  levels  5-10%  higher.    This  suggests  the 
presence  of  serum  iodine  early  after  ingestion  of  the 
Lugol  tablets.    Iodine  obviously  is  not  completely  re-
duced to iodide in the intestinal tract during absorption 
as  mentioned  in  medical  textbooks.    In  another  female 
subject post-orthoiodosupplementation for one month, a 
second  peak  of  serum  iodine  was  observed eight  hours 

after the first peak.  Apparently, iodine is not reduced to 
iodide  by  the  liver  during  enterohepatic  circulation.  
There was no significant difference in the iodide meas-
ured following the addition of reductant to serum for the 
conversion of iodine to iodide or following the addition 
of 10 times more reductant for the conversion of iodate 
to iodide.  Therefore, there was no evidence of iodate in 
the serum samples analyzed.  The oxidation of iodine to 
iodate  in  biological  systems  has  not  been  reported  and 
this metabolic pathway of iodine probably does not oc-
cur in vivo.  The only source of peripheral iodates would 
be  from  ingested  food  and  drink.    The  author  has  not 
been able to locate a publication dealing with the meas-
urements of serum iodate following ingestion of iodate.  
It is an easy experiment to 
carry out.     

37.8 

41.9 

99.0 

23.8 

20.8 

23.1 

34.7 

12.5 

19.0 

iodide 

inorganic 

Optimox 
R&D Lab 
(mg/24h) 

Serum 
iodide 
inorganic 
levels are a good index of 
the  bioavailability  of  in-
gested  iodine/iodide.    Se-
rum 
is 
cleared  rapidly  by  the  kid-
neys  with  a  daily  clearance 
rate  of  43.5  L.7    At  steady 
state  condition,  the  serum 
iodide  levels  expected  for 
patients  receiving  50  mg 
iodine/day  should  be  ap-
proximately:    serum  io-
dide (mg/L) = daily intake 
(mg)/43.5  L  =  50  mg/43.5 
=  1.15  mg/L.7    If  patients 
continue  to  excrete  low 
levels  of  iodide  after  or-
thoiodosupplementation 
for  three  months,  serum 
inorganic  iodide  levels  are  indicated  to  assess  whether 
this is due to decreased absorption or increased demand.  
Malabsorption of iodine/iodide would result in very low 
serum inorganic iodide levels (10-8M) in the presence of 
low urinary excretion.  We have not observed a case of 
malabsorption of iodine yet, when iodine supplementa-
tion  was  in  the  range  of  12.5-50.0  mg/day.    However, 
the  author  has  previously  reported  low  absorption  of 
sodium  iodide  from  salt.7    On  a  molar  basis,  there  is 
30,000 times  more chloride  than  iodide  in iodized  salt.  
Due  to  competition  for  absorption  by  the  halide  chlo-
ride, only 10% of iodide in iodized salt is absorbed. 

19.0 

Obesity increases the requirement for iodine7 and up to 
100  mg  elemental  iodine/day  may  be  required  to 
achieve  and  maintain  sufficiency.    Another  factor  in-
(Continued on next page) 

*  Urine  iodide  levels  measured  by  Induction-Coupled  Plasma  —  Mass 
Spectrometry. 
** Urine iodide levels measured by Ion Selective Electrode Assay. 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Summer   2005 

63 

 
 
 
 
volved  in  the  increased  demand  for  iodine  is  the  pres-
ence  of  excessive  amounts  of  goitrogens  from  the  diet 
and  lifestyle.    For  example,  smoking  increases  serum 
thiocyanate  levels,  interfering  with  the  sodium/iodide 
symporter function.  Sources of goitrogens are available 
from  medical  textbooks,14  although  the  halides  fluoride 
and bromide are not listed as goitrogens.  Fluoride inter-
feres with the uptake of iodide by the thyroid gland sym-
porter  system,  but  it  is  itself  not  transported  inside  the 
thyrocyte,15  suggesting  that  fluoride  causes  oxidative 
damage to the halide-binding site of the symporter.  The 
author  previously  discussed  the  goitrogenic  effect  of 
bromide even at low concentrations.1  Patients who used 
water  from  wells and  municipal  plants  may  be  exposed 
to potassium perchlorate, a very powerful goitrogen that 
behaves like  fluoride,  binding  to the halide-binding  site 
of  the  symporter  without  itself  being  symported.    A  re-
cent  Internet  publication  by  Kirk,  et  al,16  reported  the 
presence  of  high  concentrations  of  perchlorate  in  dairy 
milk  sold  in  grocery  stores  and  in  human  milk.    The 
mean  levels  of  perchlorate  were  five  times  higher  in 
breast milk than dairy milk.  Perchlorate has a selectivity 
factor of at least 30 over iodide.  To compete effectively 
against  this  goitrogen,  the  peripheral  concentration  of 
inorganic  iodide  must  be  at  least 100  times  higher  than 
the concentration of perchlorate.  Kirk, et al,16 observed 
that breast and dairy iodide levels were inversely corre-
lated  with  the  levels  of  perchlorate.    Perchlorate  and 
fluoride,  due  to  their  high  redox  potential,  may  cause 
oxidative  damage  to  the  halide-binding  site,  decreasing 
its efficiency for iodide transport.   

If the pre-orthoiodosupplementation loading test report 
shows  90%  or  more  of  the  ingested  iodine  in  the  24-
hour  urine  collection  of  patients  on  a  Western  diet,  se-
rum  inorganic  iodide  levels  are indicated to  rule  out an 
iodide transport defect or damage not just in the thyroid 
gland but throughout the whole body.  In our experience, 
this  is  very  rare  and  was  observed  in  only  two  cases.  
The intestinal absorption of iodine/iodide involves a dif-
ferent  mechanism  than  the  uptake  of  iodide  by  target 
cells  via  the  sodium/iodide  symporter.    For  example, 
chloride competes with iodide in the intestinal tract7 but 
chloride has no detectable effect on the iodide symporter 
system.17  This explains why a patient with iodide trans-
port  damage  is  able  to  absorb  iodine/iodide  efficiently 
but  unable  to  transfer  peripheral  iodine/iodide  into  the 
cells.    Peripheral  iodide  is  cleared  very  rapidly  by  the 
kidneys,  resulting  in  quantitative  recovery  of  ingested 
iodine/iodide in the urine in a patient who is very iodine-
deficient, if the cellular transport system is defective.  In 
those cases, serum inorganic iodide levels 24 hours after 
the loading test will be low, even though the loading test 
suggests  whole  body  sufficiency  for  iodine.    In  two 

obese female patients with poor clinical response to or-
thoiodosupplementation,  high  urinary  iodide  excretion 
was associated with serum inorganic iodide levels below 
10-6M  (0.13  mg/L).    The  expected  serum  levels  associ-
ated  with  high  urinary  iodide  excretion  should  be  be-
tween 5 × 10-6M to 10-5M.7 

Although  congenital  hypothyroidism  due  to  sodium/
iodide  symporter  defect is extremely  rare,  milder  forms 
of  iodine/iodide  transport defect/damage  throughout the 
whole body may be more common and undetected.  As 
of 1997, only 38 cases of congenital hypothyroidism due 
to  sodium/iodide  symporter  defect  were  reported.    Of 
interest  is  that  in  one  of  these  cases,18  a  male  Japanese 
subject,  the  diagnosis  was  not  made  until  he  was  30 
years  old.    At  the  time  of  evaluation,  he  was  euthyroid 
with a goiter while on the high iodine Japanese diet, but 
he  got  hypothyroidism  on  a  Western  diet.    Administra-
tion  of  50  mg  iodide  restored  euthyroidism.    An  active 
transport  system  for  iodide  by  a  sodium/iodide  sym-
porter  has  been  demonstrated  in  several  organs  besides 
the  thyroid  gland,  capable  of  concentrating  peripheral 
inorganic iodide 20- to 40-fold against a gradient.19  The 
cellular  uptake  of  iodide  in  some  tissues  may  involve 
other mechanisms than the symporter system.  Inorganic 
iodine/iodide has been detected in every organ and tissue 
examined,  with  relatively  high  levels  in  the  thyroid 
gland, liver, lung, heart, and adrenal glands.  The highest 
quantity  of  iodine  was  found  in  fat  tissue  and  muscle.8  
Exposure to fluoride and perchlorate can cause oxidative 
damage  to  the  halide-binding  site  of  the  sodium/iodide 
symport  system,  due  to  their  high  redox  potential.    In 
such cases, more than 50 mg iodine/day may be required 
to  overcome  the  low  efficiency  of  the  iodine  transport 
system.  If the high iodide excretion prior to orthoiodo-
supplementation is due to significant amount of iodine in 
the diet of the patient, such as the diet of mainland Japa-
nese,  or  if  due  to  ingestion  of  medications  containing 
iodine,  fasting  serum  inorganic  iodide  levels  will  be 
between  5  x  10-6  and  10-5M  (0.65-1.30 mg/L).  This is 
the range of serum iodide levels observed by the author 
when sufficiency is achieved.7 

As  mentioned  previously,  medical 
iodophobia  has 
reached  pandemic  proportion,  is  highly  contagious,  and 
has  wreaked  havoc  in  the  practice  of  medicine  and  on 
the  US  population.    More  misery  and  death  in  the  US 
may  have  resulted  from  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  effect  than 
both  World  Wars  combined.    Due  to  thyroid  fixation, 
thyroidologists  dictate  the  need  for  iodine.    However, 
thyroidologists  suffer  from  selective  iodophobia  for  the 
inorganic,  non-radioactive  forms  of  iodine  combined 
with a paradoxical iodophylia for radioiodide.  In a sur-
(Continued on next page) 

64 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Summer   2005 

 
 
  
vey  of  US  thyroidologists,  some  70%  used  radioiodide 
to  treat  hyperthyroidism1  instead  of  the  Lugol  solution 
used  previously  to  treat  this  condition  safely  and  effec-
tively with a success rate as high as 90%, compared to a 
thyroid  destruction  rate  of  90%  with  radioiodide.    The 
love affair of thyroidologist for radioiodide is not limited 
to its therapeutic application.  Radioiodide is used exten-
sively  for  diagnostic  purposes  although  safer  methods 
exist to obtain the same information.  Fluorescence scan-
ning of the thyroid gland gives more useful information 
than  isotope  scanning.19    Okerlund  commented,  “The 
types of images obtained from fluorescent thyroid scan-
ning  are  indistinguishable  from  those  of  isotope  scan-
ning,  since  the  same  electronics  and  data  presentation 
systems  are  used.    The  size,  shape,  and  positional  rela-
tionships  of  the  thyroid  lobes  are  therefore  comparable 
to isotope scanning, with the right lobe larger in the ma-
jority  of  normal  cases,  the  two  lobes  of  equal  size  in  a 
smaller number, and the presence of a larger left lobe in 
a still smaller number.”  Fluorescent scanning gives ad-
ditional  information  on  the  amount  of  stable  iodine  in 
the thyroid gland.   

Okerlund20  reported  that  thyroid  hormone  therapy  and 
irradiation  of  the  thyroid  gland  cause a  depletion of  io-
dine  from  the  thyroid  gland.    Ingestion  of  thyroid  hor-
mones  for  three  months  or  more  resulted  in  very  low 
levels  of  thyroidal  stable  iodine  reaching  the  detection 
limit  of  the  equipment.    “The  finding  that  previously 
irradiated thyroid glands are sometimes iodide depleted, 
coupled  with  the  observation  that  the  iodide  depleted 
gland  in  experimental  animals  is  physiologically  more 
sensitive  to  the  effects  of  pituitary  thyrotropin  (TSH), 
may  lead  to  changes  in  the  understanding  of  radiation-
induced  thyroid  disease  and  to  changes  in  the  clinical 
management of at least some of these patients, who are 
known  to  be  at  high  risk  for  thyroid  tumor  develop-
ment.”  Okerlund20 is suggesting that patients on thyroid 
hormones and receiving radioiodide or radiation therapy 
should  be  supplemented  with  iodine  as  a  preventative 
measure  against  the  carcinogenic  effect  of  these  inter-
ventions in iodine depleted thyroid glands.   

For  the  US  population,  Okerlund20  reported  a  mean 
value of around 10 mg iodine/thyroid, with a range of 4-
19  mg.    In  56  patients  suffering  from  autoimmune  thy-
roiditis, but with normal thyroid function, a mean value 
of  4.8  mg/thyroid  was  reported.    In  13  patients  with 
autoimmune  thyroiditis  and  hypothyroidism,  the  mean 
value  was  2.3  mg/thyroid.    In  12  patients  treated  with 
amiodarone,  a  toxic  form  of  sustained-release  iodine, 
Jonckheer21  reported  a  mean  ±  SD  of  30.5±9.2  mg/
thyroid.    In  five  patients  who  experienced  thyroid  dys-
function  during  amiodarone  therapy,  (three  with  hypo- 

and two with hyperthyroidism), the iodine content of the 
thyroid  gland  was  very  low,  being  4-10  times  lower.  
The  author  previously  calculated  that  the  theoretical 
maximum of thyroidal iodine in the adult is 50 mg.7  In 
the  12  patients  on  amiodarone  therapy,  the  mean  ±  SD 
was  30.5±9.2  mg,  giving  a  95%  confidence  limit  ranging 
from 12.0-48.9 mg/thyroid.  The upper limit of measured 
iodine in the thyroid gland of these patients, 48.9 mg is 
very close to the theoretical maximum of 50 mg/thyroid. 

Why  don’t  thyroidologists  use  fluorescent  scanning  of 
the  thyroid  instead  of  isotope  scanning?    One  possible 
reason is the fact that this procedure exposed the harmful 
effect  of  thyroid  hormone  therapy  and  radioiodide  in 
depleting  the  thyroid  gland  of  iodine.    Low  thyroid  io-
dine is associated  with  thyroid hyperplasia  and  cancer.1  
Could thyroid hormones cause the same iodine depletion 
in breast tissue?  The prevalence of breast cancer is higher 
in  women  on  thyroid  hormones.4    Thyroidologists  use 
thyroid  hormones  extensively  in  their  practice  without 
supplementing  their  patients  with  iodine.    Fluorescence 
scanning  of  the  thyroid  gland  should  be  implemented.  
Thyroidologists  would  then  have  to  face  the  damages 
they are causing to the thyroid gland and consequently to 
their patients.  

Medical  iodophobia  resulted  in  the  removal  of  iodate 
from bread 20 years ago, replacing it with the goitrogen 
bromate.   This  was  associated  with  an  increased  preva-
lence  of  obesity,  diabetes,  and  hypertension,  as  well  as 
thyroid and breast cancer.1  A recent publication reported 
an association between low iodine intake in women dur-
ing  pregnancy  and  attention  deficit  and  hyperactivity 
disorder  (ADHD)  in  their  offspring.22    However,  chil-
dren diagnosed with ADHD do not demonstrate prenatal 
thyroid dysfunction, reflected in the newborn serum thy-
roxine levels.23  The most plausible explanation is a de-
creased sensitivity of the nuclear thyroid hormone recep-
tor  to  thyroid  hormones.    We  previously  reported  evi-
dence  for  improved  receptor  response  to  thyroid  hor-
mones  following  orthoiodosupplementation.1,4    There-
fore,  iodine  is  not  only  necessary  for  the  synthesis  of 
thyroid hormones but also for their effect on target cells.  
This  effect  is  probably  due  to  iodination  of  the  thyroid 
hormone  receptor.1,4    The  essential  element  iodine, 
which  is  the  inorganic,  non-radioactive  forms,  deserves 
more  attention  from  researchers  and  clinicians.    It  may 
be the missing link in patients currently resistant to con-
ventional hormonal therapy. 

About the Author 

Guy E. Abraham, MD, is a former Professor of Obstet-
rics,  Gynecology,  and  Endocrinology  at  the  UCLA 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Summer   2005 

65 

 
 
 
 
 
 
School  of  Medicine.    Some  35  years  ago,  he  pioneered 
the development of assays to measure minute quantities 
of  steroid  hormones  in  biological  fluids.    He  has  been 
honored as follows:  General Diagnostic Award from the 
Canadian  Association  of  Clinical  Chemists,  1974;  the 
Medaille  d’Honneur  from  the  University  of  Liege,  Bel-
gium,  1976;  the  Senior  Investigator  Award  of  Phar-
macia,  Sweden,  1980.    The  applications  of  Dr.  Abra-
ham’s  techniques  to  a  variety  of  female  disorders  have 
brought  a  notable  improvement  to  the  understanding 
and  management  of  these  disorders.    Twenty-five  years 
ago,  Dr.  Abraham  developed  nutritional  programs  for 
women  with  premenstrual  tension  syndrome  and  post-
menopausal osteoporosis.  They are now the most com-
monly used dietary programs by American obstetricians 
and gynecologists.  Dr. Abraham’s current research in-
terests  include the  development  of  assays  for  the  meas-
urement  of  iodide  and  the  other  halides  in  biological 
fluids  and  their  applications  to  the  implementation  of 
orthoiodosupplementation in medical practice. 

REFERENCES 

1)  Abraham  GE.    “The  safe  and  effective  implementation  of  or-
thoiodosupplementation  in  medical  practice.”    The  Original 
Internist, 2004; 11(1):17-36. 

2)  Kelly FC.  “Iodine in medicine and pharmacy since its discovery 

– 1811-1961.”  Proc R Soc Med, 1961; 54:831-836. 

3)  Wolff J and Chaikoff IL.  “Plasma inorganic iodide as a homeo-
static  regulator  of  thyroid  function.”    J  Biol  Chem,  1948; 
174:555-564. 

4)  Abraha m  GE,  Flechas 

JC.  
“Orthoiodosupplementation:    Iodine  sufficiency  of  the  whole 
human body.”  The Original Internist, 2002; 9(4):30-41. 

and  Hakala 

JD, 

5)  Wolff J.  “Iodide goiter and the pharmacologic effects of excess 

iodide.” Am J Med, 1969; 47:101-124. 

6)  Ghent WR, Eskin BA,  Low DA, et  al.  “Iodine replacement in 
fibrocystic  disease  of  the  breast.”    Can  J  Surg,  1993;  36:453-
460. 

7)  Abraham  GE.    “The  concept  of  orthoiodosupplementation  and 
its  clinical  implications.”    The  Original  Internist,  2004;  11
(2):29-38. 

Table 4 

8)  Abraham  GE.  “Serum inorganic iodide levels following inges-
tion of a tablet form of Lugol solution: Evidence for an entero-
hepatic circulation of iodine.”  The Original Internist, 2004; 11
(3):29-34. 

9)  Martindale.  The Extra Pharmacopoeia, 28th edition.  Reynolds 

JEF, editor.  The Pharmaceutical Press, 1982; 865. 

10)  Abraham GE, Flechas JD, and Hakala JC.  “Optimum levels of 
iodine  for  greatest  mental  and  physical  health.”    The  Original 
Internist, 2002; 9():5-20. 

11)  Brownstein D.  Iodine:  Why You Need It, Why You Can’t Live 
Without  It.    Medical  Alternative  Press,  West  Bloomfield,  MI, 
2004. 

12)  Abraham  GE,  Flechas  JD,  and  Hakala  JC.    “Measurement  of 
urinary iodide levels by ion-selective electrode:  Improved sensi-
tivity  and  specificity  by  chromatography  on  anion-exchange 
resin.”  The Original Internist, 2004; 11(4):19-32. 

13)  Abraham  GE.    “Iodine  supplementation  markedly  increases 
urinary  excretion  of  fluoride  and  bromide.”    Townsend  Letter, 
2003; 238:108-109. 

14)  Delange FM.  “Iodine deficiency.”  In:  Werner & Ingbar’s The 
Thyroid.    Braverman  LE  and  Utiger  RD,  editors.    Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2000; 295-316.   

15)  Galletti PM and Joyet G.  “Effect of fluorine on thyroidal iodine 
metabolism in hyperthyroidism.”  J Clin Endocr, 1958; 18:1102-
1110. 

16)  Kirk  AB,  et  al.    “Perchlorate  and  iodide  in  dairy  and  breast 

milk.”  Environ Sci & Technol A, 2005. 

17)  Eskandari  S,  et  al.    “Thyroid  Na+/I–  symporter.”    J  of  Biol 

Chem, 1997; 272:27230-27238. 

18)  Matsuda  A  and  Kosugi  S.    “A  homozygous  missense  mutation 
of  the  sodium/iodide  symporter  gene  causing  iodide  transport 
defect.  J Clin Endo & Metab, 1997; 82:3966-3917. 

19)  Brown-Grant  K.    “Extrathyroidal  iodide  concentrating  mecha-

nisms.”  Physiol Rev, 1961; 41:189-213. 

20)  Okerlund  MD.    “The  clinical  utility  of  fluorescent  scanning  of 
the  thyroid.”    In:    Medical  Applications  of  Fluorescent  Excita-
tion  Analysis.    Kaufman  and  Price,  editors.    CRC  Press,  Boca 
Raton, FL, 1979; 149-160. 

21)  Jonckheer  MH.    “Amiodarone  and  the  thyroid  gland.    A  re-

view.”  Acta Cardiologica, 1981; XXXVI(3):199-205. 

22)  Vermiglio F, et al.  “Attention deficit and hyperactivity disorder 
in  the  offspring  of  mothers  exposed  to  mid-moderate  iodine 
deficiency:    A  possible  novel  iodine  deficiency  disorder  in  de-
veloped countries.”  J Clin Endo Metab, 2004; 89:6054-6060. 
23)  Soldin  O,  et al.   “Newborn  thyroxin levels  and  childhood  ADHD.”  

Clin Biochem. 2002; 35:131-136.  u  

Fluoride and Bromide Levels Measured in 24-hour Urine Collections of 5 Subjects 
Following the Iodine/Iodide Loading Test Before and After 1 Month on Iodoral® at 3 Tab/Day 

Fluoride (mg/24)  

Bromide (mg/24h)  

Subject  Sex  Control  Before Iodoral® 

After 1 Month 
of Iodoral® 

Control  Before Iodoral® 

After 1 Month 
of Iodoral® 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

F 

F 

F 

M 

M 

M 

0.40 

0.065 

0.62 

0.35 

0.05 

1.20 

0.80 

1.20 

1.80 

0.62 

0.93 

1.40 

0.60 

0.80 

— 

0.44 

0.79 

1.20 

6.8 

12.5 

4.8 

6.8 

18.4 

12.2 

24.2 

36.4 

5.2 

34.8 

336.0 

24.5 

18.6 

34.0 

— 

32.0 

288.0 

24.0