The Safe and Effective 
Implementation of 
Orthoiodosupplementation 
In Medical Practice 

by Guy E. Abraham, MD 

I.  Introduction 
Of  all  the  elements  known  so  far  to  be  essential  for 
health,  iodine  is  the  most  misunderstood  and  the  most 
feared.    Yet,  it  is  by  far  the  safest  of  all  the  trace  ele-
ments known to be essential for human health.  It is the 
only trace element that can be ingested safely in amounts 
up to 100,000 times the RDA.  For example, potassium 
iodide has been prescribed safely to pulmonary patients 
in daily amounts of up to 6.0 gm/day, in large groups of 
such  patients  for  several  years.1-3    It  is  important,  how-
ever, to emphasize that this safety record only applies to 
inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine/iodide,  not  to  organic 
iodine-containing  drugs  and  to  radioiodides.    Unfortu-
nately, the severe side effects of iodine-containing drugs 
have  been  attributed  to  inorganic  iodine/iodide,  even 
though  published  studies  clearly  demonstrate  that  it  is 
the whole organic molecule that is cytotoxic, not the io-
dine covalently bound to this molecule.  To quote Philli-
pou, et al:4  “We can, therefore, conclude that the effect 
of  amiodarone,  benziodarone,  Na  iopanate,  and  other 
iodine  containing  substances  with  similar  effects  is  due 
to the entire molecule and not to the iodine liberated.  It 
should be noted that the cytotoxic effect of amiodarone 
in all cultures is also due to the entire molecule and not 
to the iodine present in it.”  Several forms of iodine are 
used  in  clinical  medicine  (Table  1).    Unless  otherwise 
stated,  this  presentation  is  concerned  only  with  inor-
ganic, non-radioactive iodine/iodide.   

Medical iodophobia is the unwarranted fear of using and 
recommending  inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine/iodide 
within  the  range  known  from  the  collective  experience 
of  three  generations  of  clinicians  to  be  the  safest  and 
most effective amounts for treating symptoms and signs 
of  iodine/iodide  deficiency  (12.5-37.5  mg).    The  range 
of  daily  intake  of  this  essential  nutrient  is  hereafter  re-
ferred  to  as  orthoiodosupplementation  because  it  is  the 
range of iodine/iodide intake required in order to achieve 
whole  body  sufficiency  for  this  element  based  on  a  re-
cently  developed  iodine/iodide  loading  test.    (See  Sec-
tion VII for more details on the loading test.) 

Medicoiodophobes  suffer  from:    A)  a  split  personality 
which results in iodophobia within the orthoiodosupple-
mentation range previously used safely and successfully 
in medical practice and iodophylia for megadoses of io-
dide (up to 12gm/day); B) double standards, which ren-
der those physicians intolerant to the minor side effects 
of the inorganic forms and extremely tolerant to the se-
vere side effects of the radioactive and organic forms; C) 
amnesia  pertaining  to  the  inorganic,  non-radioactive 
forms when making therapeutic decisions; D) confusion, 
attributing  the  severe  side  effects  of  organic  iodine-
containing  drugs  to  inorganic  iodine/iodide;  and  E)  an 
altered  state  of  consciousness,  allowing  doublethink, 
doublespeak, and contradictory logic to become accept-
able.  Although the factors involved in medical iodopho-
bia  are  still  unknown,  decreased  cognition  seems  in-
volved.  Since low iodine intake is associated with intel-
lectual  impairment,  deficiency  of  this  essential  element 
cannot be ruled out, and if present, would create a self-
perpetuating  phenomenon.    Needless  to  say,  medical 
iodophobia  is  contagious  and  can  be  transmitted  to  pa-
tients  and  other  physicians  (iatrogenic  iodophobia).  
Medical  iodophobia  will  remain  a  syndrome  until  the 
causes  are  discovered  and  effective  therapy  imple-
mented.  It is very likely however, that medical iodopho-
bia will eventually be classified as an iodine-deficiency 
disease.  

Discovered in Imperial France5 a century before the con-
cept of essential trace elements was proposed by Gabriel 
Bertrand,6  the  first  trace  element  tested  in  human  sub-
jects and recognized as essential to human health,7,8 the 
most deficient trace element in the world,9 iodine had the 
misfortune of attracting the attention of endocrinologists 
(Continued on next page) 

Table 1 

Various Forms of Iodine/Iodide 
Used in Clinical Medicine 

A)  Inorganic 

1)  Non-radioactive 

a)  Iodides (i.e., SSKI) 
b)  Tincture of iodine 
c)  Lugol solution 

2)  Radioactive iodides for diagnostic and  
      therapeutic purposes 

B)  Organic 

1)  Naturally occurring 

a)  Thyroid hormones 
b)  Thyroid iodolipids 

2)  Man-made 

a)  Radiographic contrast media 
b)  Iodine-containing drugs (I.e., amiodarone) 
c)  Iodinated lipids for goiter prevention 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

17 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
because it is incorporated into some very important hor-
mones of the thyroid gland.10-13  Starting out as a pana-
cea  for all  human ills,14 iodine,  as  an  essential  element,  
eventually  became  associated  exclusively  with  the  thy-
roid  gland.15    This  thyroid  fixation  resulted  in  endocri-
nologists dictating the human needs for this nutrient.  All 
human applications of iodine became eventually subser-
vient to the dictates of misinformed endocrinologists. 

For example, disinfection of water for human consump-
tion  and  in  swimming  pools  is  far  superior,  safer,  and 
less expensive with the use of iodine at 1 to 2 ppm, than 
with  the  use  of  chlorine  and  its  derivatives  at  the  same 
concentrations.16-19  However, unfounded concern about 
the  adverse  effects  of  iodine  at  these  levels  on  the  thy-
roid  gland,20-22 and vide infra  has  prevented  the  widespread 
use  of iodine for these  applications,  with toxic  chlorine 
and its derivatives used by default.  All studies published 
so far favor iodine over chlorine for treatment of munici-
pal  waters  and  swimming  pools,  “Because  of  the  in-
creasing difficulty experienced by many communities in 
achieving  satisfactory  disinfection  of  public  water  sup-
plies with acceptable concentrations of chlorine, a feasi-
bility study on the use of iodine for this purpose was un-
dertaken.”19    “The  effectiveness,  ease  of  administration 
and palatability were prime reasons for considering iodine 
as a disinfectant of community water supplies… effective 
bacteriological control of the water was maintained by all 
concentrations of iodine used in this study.”17  “At an io-
dine concentration of 1 mg/liter (1 ppm), the water met 
all  standards  for  safety  and  palatability  (1962  USPHS 
Drinking  Water  Standards)…  During  the  five  years  in 
which this study was conducted no instances of urticaria 
or  iodism  were  observed.”19    “No  evidence  of  iodine-
induced  allergic  phenomena  was  detected  during  this 
study.”17  “Comparative data indicate that disinfection of 
an  Olympic-size  swimming  pool  can  be  accomplished 
with iodine at half the dose of chlorination… Use of the 
iodinated swimming pool caused no significant changes 
in either the RAI uptakes or PBI concentrations.”19  The 
advantage of iodine over chlorine as a disinfectant in the 
treatment of municipal waters is that it could be used as 
a  disinfectant  and  also  as  a  source  of  a  very  important 
essential element.  It is obvious that the benefits of such 
an  approach  would  outweigh  the  risks,  based  on  the 
studies mentioned above. 

When  different  groups  of  competitive  swimmers  were 
asked about their preference between chlorine and iodine 
as a disinfectant of swimming pools,19 they overwhelm-
ingly chose iodine.  None preferred chlorine.  “All mem-
bers of the swimming teams of five universities who par-
ticipated in AAWU swimming championships that were 
held  in  the  Stanford  pools  were  asked  to  express  their 

opinions of iodine-treated water as compared with chlo-
rine-treated  water…  Seventeen  of  the  20  freshmen  and 
varsity swimming team members expressed a preference 
for  the  iodine-treated  pool  in  respect  to  eye  irritation.  
The other three had no preference, but none preferred the 
chlorine  treatment.    Of  the  championship  swimming 
contestants, 48 preferred the iodine-treated pool, five had 
no  preference,  but  none  preferred  the  chlorine-treated 
pool...  Twenty-eight  of  the  subjects  who  had  been  ex-
posed  to  the  iodine-treated  water  for  one  month  were 
examined  by  the  three  physicians  of  the  research  staff, 
each  of  whom  made  his  observations  independently  of 
the  others.    Twenty-seven  of  the  swimmers  examined 
received  a  completely  negative  rating  for  eye  irritation.  
In  only  one  student  was  a  mild  conjunctivitis  found  on 
medical examination.  This student wears contact lenses 
and  stated  that  his  eye  irritation  had  improved  in  a  mi-
raculous  way  since  the  pool  had  been  treated  with  io-
dine.” 

In the early 1960s, iodine was added to bread as a dough 
conditioner.  One slice of bread contained the full RDA 
of 150 µg.23,24  As would be expected, because of isotope 
dilution effect, the  percent  of  radioiodide  uptake  by  the 
thyroid  gland  decreased  from  20-30%  to  10-20%.    In 
1965,  London,  et  al25  from  the  National  Institute  of 
Health evaluated the amount of iodine present in 32 bak-
ery  products  from  12  different  commercial  bakeries.  
They reported that a typical diet contributed to approxi-
mately  1  mg  of  iodine  per  day  and  726  µg  came  from 
bakery products.  Concern was expressed over the inhi-
bition  of  thyroid  hormone  synthesis  in  thyrotoxic  pa-
tients  at those levels of iodine.  The last sentence of their 
publication  read,  “One  milligram  of  iodine  will  suppress 
the  uptake  of  radioactive  iodine  by  the  normal  thyroid 
gland, probably by simple dilution of the dose, and may 
considerably reduce organic binding of iodine in the thy-
roid glands of thyrotoxic persons.7”  Reference 7 of their 
manuscript is a study published in 1949 by Stanley26 one 
year  after  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect  was  reported  in 
rats.27  The first paragraph of Stanley’s manuscript stated 
the  objective,  “The  interest  of  thyroidologists  was  re-
cently aroused by the demonstration by Wolff and Chai-
koff (1) that, with levels of serum iodide higher than 20 
to 30 micrograms per cent, organic binding of iodine in 
the rat thyroid was inhibited.  Extension of these obser-
vations to man was undertaken.” 

The  interest  of  thyroidologists  could  not  have  been 
aroused so quickly by the publication of Wolff and Chai-
koff in The Journal of Biological Chemistry,27 a journal 
involved in publishing research in the basic sciences, not 
clinical medicine.  The thyroidologist with aroused inter-
(Continued on next page) 

18 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
est was Stanley himself who obviously had insider infor-
mation  in  order to publish his  manuscript  within  a  year 
following  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  publication,  considering 
the fact that it takes several months for the review proc-
ess  in  peer  review  journals,  and  that  it  would  have  re-
quired several months for him to design and perform his 
experiments  after  reading  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  paper.  
During the year Stanley published his “extension of the 
Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect  to  man,”  he  co-authored  a  paper 
with  Astwood  on  using  goitrogens  to  manage  patients 
with Graves’ disease as an alternative to using inorganic 
iodine/iodide.  It is a strange coincidence that the investi-
gators who authored the iodophobic publications regard-
ing the so-called inhibition of organic binding of radio-
active  iodide  in  the  thyroid  gland  by  the  administration 
of inorganic, non-radioactive iodide, were also involved 
in testing goitrogens in laboratory animals and in normal 
human  subjects  and  in  implementing  the  use  of  these 
goitrogens as an alternative to inorganic iodine/iodide in 
patients with Graves’ disease (See Section IV).    

Stanley concluded, “Thus, the observations of Wolff and 
Chaikoff in the rat were extended to man.”  However, in 
a  review  published  in  1969,  Wolff28  stated,  “The  rarity 
of iodide goiter in the face of the extensive exposure of a 
great many patients to iodide has not been satisfactorily 
explained.”  Without preconceived ideas, it is easily ex-
plained  —  inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine/iodide  is 
safe.    “The  demonstration  of  the  Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect 
in man remains presumptive.”  Several researchers erro-
neously concluded that the rapid decrease in serum thy-
roxine  (T4)  following  oral  ingestion  of  inorganic  io-
dine/iodide in thyrotoxic patients was due to the Wolff-
Chaikoff Effect, that is sustained inhibition of T4 synthe-
sis.  However, Wartofsky, et al29 in 1970, evaluated the 
effect  of  Lugol  solution,  administered  at  five  drops  (30 
mg  iodine/iodide)  three  times  a  day  in  five  thyrotoxic 
patients.  Following a well-designed protocol, they con-
cluded  that  “the  rapid  decrease  in  T4  secretion  induced 
by iodine is not the result of an acute sustained inhibition 
of  T4  synthesis  (The  Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect),  but  rather 
results  from  an  abrupt  decrease  in the fractional  rate  of 
thyroid  T4  release.”    Therefore,  in  hyperthyroidism,  io-
dine/iodide in Lugol at a daily dose of 90 mg induced a 
physiological  trend  toward  normalization  of  thyroid 
function, a beneficial effect.  

One can appreciate the thyroid fixation of confused en-
docrinologists who ignore the rest of the human body in 
favor of misinterpreted laboratory tests assessing thyroid 
function.    The  concern  about  decreased  uptake  of  ra-
dioiodide  by  the  thyroid  gland  following  ingestion  of 
increasing  amounts of  inorganic,  non-radioactive iodide 
shows a lack of understanding of the physiological inter-

pretation of the iodide tracer.  Theoretically, as we previ-
ously discussed,30 the uptake of radioactive iodide by the 
thyroid  gland  should  be  zero  in  order  to  achieve  suffi-
ciency  of  the  thyroid  for  inorganic,  non-radioactive  io-
dide.  Decreased thyroid uptake of inorganic radioiodide 
is  an  effect  to  be  desired,  not  avoided.    Besides,  a  low 
radioiodide  uptake  by  the  thyroid  resulting  from  ade-
quate  intake  of  inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine/iodide 
(orthoiodosupplementation) serves as a preventive meas-
ure  against  unexpected  exposure  to  radioactive  io-
dide/iodine.30    Based  on  a  review  of  the  literature,  we 
computed  the  daily  amount  of  iodine/iodide  needed  for 
sufficiency  of  the  thyroid  gland  and  the  whole  human 
body.    This  amount,  called  orthoiodosupplementation, 
amounted to 100 times the RDA.30 

In the 1980s, thanks to iodophobia, iodine was replaced 
with bromine in the bread-making process.31  Bromide is 
a  goitrogen  and interferes with iodide utilization  by  the 
thyroid  gland,32-34  and  possibly  by  the  mammary  gland 
also.35    Iodine  has  an  anticarcinogenic  effect  on  the 
breast.30    The  last  national  nutritional  survey  showed  a 
trend  of  decreasing  iodine  intake  by  the  US  popula-
tion.30,31  Currently 15% of the US adult female popula-
tion excreted in their urine less than 0.05 mg iodide/L, a 
level  classified  by  the  World  Health  Organization 
(WHO)  as  iodine  deficiency.    One  must  keep  in  mind 
that  the  amounts  of  daily  intake  of  iodine  set  by  the 
WHO  were  recommended  with  the  goal  of  preventing 
simple goiter and stupidity (cretinism), not sufficiency of 
the  whole  human  body  for  iodine,  an  amount  we  esti-
mated to be 100-fold higher than the recommended daily 
intake.30    Concurrent  with  the  decreased  intake  of  io-
dine/iodide  and  increased  intake  of  bromine  in  the  US 
population,  a  trend  of  increasing  prevalence  of  cancers 
of the mammary and thyroid glands was reported.30 

Velicky, et al33 in a 1997 publication, reported that rats 
consuming low levels of bromide, similar to levels pres-
ently  consumed  by  human  subjects,  developed  goiter, 
even  though  those  rats  received  the  normal  amount  of 
iodide  in  their  diet.    Under  histological  examinations, 
increased  mitotic  activity  of  the  follicular  epithelium 
was observed.  The values of the mitotic index increased 
with increasing intake of bromide.  The authors discuss-
ing their results, commented, “This finding is important 
in connection with the data showing an increasing expo-
sure  of  living  organisms  to  environmental  bromine 
which represents an important environmental factor con-
tributing  to  the  development  of  endemic  goiter;  this  is 
caused by a decreased utilization of the consumed iodine 
which  produces  a  relative  iodine  deficiency  even  when 
the  iodine  intake  is  sufficient...  The  transport  of  iodine 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

19 

 
 
 
 
and its organification can be blocked by Br- ions due to 
a  mutual  competition  between  bromide  and  iodide  ani-
ons…  This  results  in  a  thyroxin  and  triiodothyronine 
deficiency,  which  in  turn  increases  secretion  of  TSH... 
Each stimulation of cell proliferation is obviously a key 
factor  in  the  tumor  growth  of  the  thyroid  (Williams, 
1992) and an increased incidence of thyroid carcinoma in 
humans  is  higher  in  regions  with  iodine  deficiency 
(Gaitan, et al, 1991).”   

Shimomura,  et  al36  observed  that  bromine  enhances  the 
biological activity of a tumor promoter.    Sangster,  et  al37 
reported a decreased ability to concentrate and sleepiness 
in  normal  male  subjects  ingesting  4  mg  sodium  bro-
mide/kg  bw/day.    This  hypnotic  effect  could  be  due  to 
oxidation  and  organification  of  bromide  in  the  central 
nervous system.  Torii, et al38 tested an organic bromine 
compound,  isolated  from  the  cerebrospinal  fluid  of  pa-
tients  with  bromism.    In  cats,  this  organic  bromine  in-
duced REM sleep.  Therefore, bromine has a zombifying 
potential.  Why iodine was replaced with a goitrogen pos-
sessing carcinogenic and zombifying potentials in a popu-
lation already very iodine deficient, even by the very low 
RDA standard, remains a mystery!  Nevertheless, it is a 
very effective way to keep a nation sick and zombified. 

The purpose of this manuscript is to review studies pub-
lished  during  the late 1800s  and early  1900s  describing 
the effect of oral ingestion of inorganic, non-radioactive 
iodine/iodide  in  patients  with  simple  goiter  and  in 
Graves’  disease,  both  conditions  due  to  iodine/iodide 
deficiency.    This  physiological  approach  will  be  com-
pared  with  the  current  non-physiological  trend  of  pre-

Table 2 

The Halides: 
Discovery in Chronological Order 

Halide 

Chloride 

Iodide 

Bromide 

Fluoride 

Astatin 

Discovery 

Year 

Discoverer  Country 

1809 
1810 

1811 

1826 

1886 

1940 

Gay-Lussac 
H. Davy 

France 
Great Britain 

B. Courtois 

France 

A.J. Balard 

France 

F. Moissan 

France 

Carson, 
McKenzie, 
Segre 

US 

All isotopes are radioactive —  exist naturally in  minute amounts.  
First  isolated  as  a  byproduct  of bombardment  of  a  bismuth  target 
with alpha particles in a 60-inch cyclotron. 

scribing  to  iodine-deficient  female  patients  with  hypo-
thyroidism  and  simple  goiter  the  hormone  thyroxine 
(T4),  which  increases  the  risk  of  breast  cancer  in  those 
patients (discussed in Section III).  In Graves’ disease, the 
non-physiological use of goitrogens and radioiodide has 
replaced  iodine/iodide  resulting  in  hypothyroidism  of 
these  unfortunate  patients.   It  seems  that  no  matter  what 
your thyroid problem is, you always end up getting T4.  In 
the discussion of published data on iodine-induced hypo-
thyroidism and hyperthyroidism, a clear distinction will 
be made between inorganic versus organic forms, in or-
der  to  demonstrate  that  adverse  effects  attributed  to  io-
dine  in  most  publications  were  the  result  of  ingestion 
and  injection  of  organic  forms  of  iodine-containing 
drugs.    A  review  of  some  historical  events  combined 
with  some  physiological  aspects  of  iodide  metabolism 
by the thyroid gland will be discussed in order to demon-
strate  that  inadequate  iodine/iodide  intake  combined 
with goitrogens, not excess iodide, is the cause of auto-
immune  thyroiditis.    Last, the  concept  of orthoiodosup-
plementation will be presented, including the description 
of  a  simple  iodine/iodide  loading  test  to  assess  suffi-
ciency of the whole human body.  Orthoiodosupplemen-
tation is the safest and most effective method of supple-
menting  patients  with  this  essential  trace  element  in 
amounts for whole body sufficiency.  

II.  The Discovery of Iodine 
The  discovery  of  the  stable  halides  —  chloride,  iodide, 
bromide,  and  fluoride  —  seems  to  have  been  a  French 
enterprise.    All  four  halides  were  identified  by  French 
scientists,  (Table  2)  with  H.  Davy  from  Great  Britain, 
sharing  the  discovery  of  chloride  with  Gay-Lussac  in 
1809-1810.39 

Bernard  Courtois,  a  French  chemist,  was  a  saltpeter 
(potassium  nitrate)  manufacturer.    Saltpeter  was  one  of 
the compounds needed for the manufacture of gunpow-
der.  Seaweed ash was used as a valuable source of so-
dium  and  potassium  salts.    Sulfuric  acid  was  added  to 
remove interfering compounds before the salts could be 
precipitated.  One day toward the end of 1811, Courtois 
added too much acid to the suspension of seaweed ash.  
The  iodides  in  seaweed  were  oxidized  to  iodine,  which 
sublimated and formed a violet vapor above the prepara-
tion.    The  crystals  obtained  from  condensation  of  the 
iodine vapor were analyzed by Courtois, and he prepared 
several iodide salts, but he never published his findings.  
Some  of  these  crystals  ended  up  in  the  hands  of  Gay-
Lussac  and  Ampere,  who  gave  some  to  H.  Davy.    An 
anonymous  paper  was  published  in  1813,  written  by 
Gay-Lussac, giving full credit to Courtois for the discov-
ery of iodine.5  In the same year, C.B. Desormes and N. 
(Continued on next page) 

20 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
 
Clement  presented  Courtois’  discovery  at  a  meeting  of 
the Imperial Institute of France.  Gay-Lussac named the 
new  element  “iode”  from  the  Greek  ioeides  meaning 
“violet-colored.”  H. Davy anglicized the name “iode, ” 
calling it “iodin,” which became “iodine” in the 1930s. 

By  1813,  Gay-Lussac  had  synthesized  several  products 
from iodine and fully characterized this new element, but 
he  gave  full  credit  to  Courtois  for  the  discovery  of  io-
dine.  According to the Dictionary of Scientific Discov-
ery,39  Davy,  in  an  attempt  to  eclipse  Gay-Lussac  in  the 
characterization of iodine, did the unthinkable for a sci-
entist of his rank, “A large part of Davy’s claim for the 
originality  of  his  study  of  iodine  depends  on  his  com-
plete honesty in claiming certain knowledge before that 
of Gay-Lussac and in particular in dating as 11 Decem-
ber a paper read to the Institute on 13 December (that is 
the day following Gay-Lussac’s publication).”  Courtois 
did not benefit from his discovery.  “In 1831, the Insti-
tute awarded him a prize of 6,000 francs for the discov-
ery.    By  this  time  Courtois  had  given  up  the  saltpeter 
business and, from the 1820s, attempted to make a living 
by  preparing  and  selling  iodine  and  iodine  compounds.  
This enterprise also failed, and he died in poverty.”39 

The  history  of  iodine  in  medicine  and  pharmacy  was 
reviewed by F.C. Kelly14 from its discovery in 1811 up 
to  1961.    The  review  of  the  history  of  iodine  by  L.E. 
Braverman,15  covering  the  period  from  1961  to  1994, 
was limited to the thyroid gland exclusively, because by 
then,  thyroid  fixation  had  become  pandemic,  and  the 
only role of iodine as an essential element was assumed 
to  be  due  to  its  incorporation  in  the  thyroid  hormones.  
Detailed information about the intrigue and the political 
climate may be found in the Dictionary of Scientific Bi-
ography39  edited  by  C.C.  Gillispie  and  published  in  14 
volumes  by  Simon  and  Schuster.    The  scientists  are 
listed alphabetically with their accomplishments. 

III.   The Use of Inorganic, non-radioactive 
Iodine/Iodide in Simple Goiter 
Centuries  before  the  discovery  of  iodine,  seaweed  was 
used in the treatment of thyroid enlargement (goiter).  In 
his  review,  F.C.  Kelly14  mentioned  Chinese  physician 
Ke-Hung (281-361 AD), who used seaweed in the treat-
ment of goiter.  Five centuries later, Wang Tao listed 36 
prescriptions for goiter, 27 of which contained seaweed.  
The name “thyroid” was assigned to this gland by Brit-
ish  physician  Thomas  Wharton  in  his  book  Adeno-
graphia,  written  in  Latin  and  published  by  himself  in 
1656.39  The goal of this book was “a description of the 
glands of the entire body.”  The name “thyroid” (shield) 
was  assigned  to  the  gland  because  the  thyroid  cartilage 
behind the gland was in the shape of a shield.  Wharton 

postulated  that  the  role  of  the  gland  was  purely  esthet-
ical.  He observed that the thyroid was larger in women 
than in men, “It (the thyroid gland) contributes much to 
the beauty of the neck… particularly in females, for this 
reason, a larger gland has been assigned, which renders 
their necks … more beautiful.” 

After  the  discovery  of  iodine  from  seaweed,  a  Swiss 
physician,  J.F.  Coindet,  who  previously  used  success-
fully burnt sponge and seaweed for goiter, reasoned that 
iodine  could  be  the  active  ingredient  in  seaweed.    In 
1819, he tested tincture of iodine at 250 mg/day, an ex-
cessive  amount  by  today’s  standard,  in  150  goiter  pa-
tients with great success.  He could reduce significantly 
the size of goiter within a week.  He published his results 
in 1820.40  He later reported some side effects to iodine, 
including  iodine-induced  thyrotoxicosis.41    “I  have  ob-
served goitrous patients who have been greatly affected 
by the treatment:  acceleration of the pulse, palpitations, 
dry  frequent  cough,  insomnia,  rapid  emaciation,  loss  of 
strength, in others only swelling of the legs or tremor of 
a painful hardening of the goiter, sometimes a shrinkage 
of the breast, remarkable and sustained increase in appe-
tite.”  He was the first physician to use iodine in medical 
practice.  To be discussed later, the use of combined in-
organic  iodine/iodide  (Lugol  solution)  in  the  right 
amounts  resulted in  better response  with less  complica-
tions than iodine and iodide alone. 

Because iodine is not very soluble in water, (330 mg/L), 
alcoholic tinctures were first used externally as an anti-
septic and internally as a treatment for every conceivable 
medical and surgical condition.  In 1829, Jean Lugol, a 
French physician researching the medical uses of iodine 
in  infectious  diseases,42  observed  that  the  presence  of 
potassium iodide in water increases markedly the aque-
ous  solubility  of  iodine,  from  0.33  gm/L  to  50  gm/L.  
The  Lugol  solution  contains  5%  iodine  and  10%  potas-
sium  iodide  in  water.    He  used  his  preparation  for  the 
treatment of “les maladies scrofuleuses.”  The antiseptic 
properties of iodine were widely used from the discovery 
of iodine until today.  In 1873, the French bacteriologist 
Davaine  used  tincture  of  iodine as an  agent to treat an-
thrax in patients suffering from this infection.39  Orthoio-
dosupplementation30 may be the best preventive measure 
against  bioterrorism.    It  is  important  to  point  out  that 
iodides  have  no  antiseptic  and  antibacterial  properties.  
Only  iodine,  the  oxidized  state,  is  antiseptic.    Since  io-
dine is not very soluble in water, the best preparation of 
an aqueous solution of iodine is Lugol solution because 
it allows the administration of a relatively large amount 
of iodine in small volumes of water.  The collective ex-
perience  of  a  large  number  of  clinicians  over  the  last 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

21 

 
 
 
 
 
century  has  resulted  in  the  recommended  daily  amount 
of 0.1 to 0.3 ml of Lugol, containing from 12.5-37.5 mg 
elemental  iodine,  for  iodine/iodide  supplementation.  
Interestingly,  this  is  the  range  of  iodine/iodide  intake 
required for whole body sufficiency based on a recently 
developed  iodine/iodide  loading  test  (discussed  in  Sec-
tion  VII).    We  have  confirmed  the  observations  of  our 
medical predecessors who were keen observers. 

In  1831,  French  chemist  and  agronomist  J.G.  Boussin-
gault43 proposed iodized sodium chloride (table salt) as a 
means of preventing goiter.  Such a proposal was imple-
mented first in Europe and then in the 1920s in the US.  
That was a very bad idea because it gave a false sense of 
iodine  sufficiency  and  resulted  in  the  public  relying  on 
iodized  salt  for  supplementation  instead  of  the  previ-
ously used forms of iodine and iodide, such as the Lugol 
solution.  In order to ingest 12.5 mg of elemental iodine 
from  salt,  one  would  have  to  consume  165  gm  of  salt; 
and  obviously three times that  amount  of  salt  would be 
required  for  supplying  37.5  mg  elemental  iodine.    Be-
sides, table salt contains iodide only, not iodine.  To be 
discussed later, iodine is very important for normal func-
tion of breast tissue.  Therefore, supplementation should 
contain both forms, iodine and iodide. 

In  1926,  physician  C.L.  Hartsock,  from  Cleveland, 
Ohio44  wrote,  “Iodized  salt  is  now  being  very  much 
more extensively used by the public than other forms of 
iodine,  such  as  sodium  iodide,  iodostarine,  and  com-
pound  solution  of  iodine  (Lugol’s  solution),  probably 
because  of  the  propaganda  to  insure  its  use.”    Iodized 
salt was unfortunately used as a substitute for the previ-
ously  recommended  forms  of  iodine/iodide.    The  aver-
age  daily  intake  of  iodide  from  iodized  salt  represents 
less than 1% of the recommended daily intake of Lugol 
solution.  Implementation of iodization of salt was asso-
ciated  with  an  increased  incidence  of  autoimmune  thy-
roiditis.  In Section VI of this manuscript, we propose a 
mechanism  that  could  explain  how  inadequate  iodide 
intake, combined with goitrogens in a previously iodine-
deficient individual, caused oxidative damage to thyroid 
peroxydase  and  thyroglobulin,  resulting  in  an  autoim-
mune  reaction  to  those  proteins.    The  same  mechanism 
can  explain  autoimmune  thyrotoxicosis  (Graves’  dis-
ease).  Hartsock recommended the use of a tablet of io-
dine/iodide in known and fixed amounts as the best form 
of  supplementation,  just  like  the  most  popular  form  of 
supplementation  used  today  for  vitamins,  minerals  and 
trace elements.  “Tablets containing definite amounts of 
iodine seemed to be the method of choice.” 

Following  Coindet’s  original  success  in  treating  goiter 
with  tincture  of  iodine  in  1819  and  1820,  “In  the  first 

flush  of  enthusiasm  for  the  newcomer,  physicians  and 
surgeons  tested  it  and  tried  it  for  every  conceivable 
pathological  condition.”14    However,  no  attempt  was 
made  to  study  the  optimal  daily  requirement  of  the  hu-
man  body  for  iodine,  because  the  concept  of  essential 
trace elements was not proposed until the end of the 19th 
century by Gabriel Bertrand.6  Even after iodine was rec-
ognized as an essential element in the 1920s, mainly due 
to Marine’s studies,7,8 no attempt was made to assess the 
optimal daily requirement of this nutrient for sufficiency 
of the whole human body.  Marine8 used a daily average 
of 9 mg iodide in the prevention of goiter in adolescent 
girls, an amount 60 times the current RDA for iodine.  In 
1930,  Thompson,  et  al45  stated:  “The  normal  daily  re-
quirement  of  the  body  for  iodine  has  never  been  deter-
mined.”  This statement is still true today, more than 70 
years  later.    We  still  don’t  know  the  iodine/iodide  re-
quirements for whole body sufficiency.   

In  1821,  Francois  Magendie  was  the  first  to  put  iodine 
into  a  pharmacopoeia.14.    The  number  of  preparations 
containing  iodine  and  iodine  compounds  increased  rap-
idly afterward.  To quote Kelly, “In the Great Exhibition 
at the Crystal Palace in Hyde Park in May 1851, iodine 
and iodine compounds were publicly shown for the first 
time by 10 pharmaceutical firms… by 1890, to choose a 
date  at  random,  the  sixth  edition  of  Martindale’s  Extra 
Pharmacopoeia  sponsored  30  medicaments  derived 
from  iodine;  the  ‘Iodine  Centenary  Volume’  compiled 
by The Prescriber in 1914, mentions 45 iodine prepara-
tions; by 1928 Martindale had extended its coverage to 
128  iodine  items;  and,  in  an  international  index  pub-
lished  in  1956,  and  devoted  exclusively  to  iodine  phar-
maceuticals, no less than 1,700 approved pharmacopoe-
ial names, proprietary names, synonyms, and alternative 
designations are alphabetically listed.”   

As late as 1995, the 19th edition of Remington’s Science 
and  Practice  of  Pharmacy,46  continued  to  recommend 
between 0.1 to 0.3 ml daily of Lugol 5% solution in the 
treatment  of  iodine  deficiency  and  simple  goiter.    The 
5%  Lugol  solution  contains  50  mg  iodine  and  100  mg 
potassium iodide per ml with a total of 125 mg elemental 
iodine/ml.  The suggested daily amount of 0.1 ml to 0.3 
ml is equivalent to 12.5 mg to 37.5 mg, with 40% iodine 
and 
salt 
(orthoiodosupplementation).  This amount was based on 
the collective experience of clinicians over the last cen-
tury.  We have recently confirmed the keen observation 
of  our  medical  predecessors.   The range  of  Lugol  solu-
tion  they  recommended  is  exactly  the  range  of  io-
dine/iodide intake for whole body sufficiency based on a 
recently developed iodine/iodide loading test (discussed 
(Continued on next page) 

potassium 

iodide 

60% 

the 

as 

22 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
 
in  Section  VII).    In  the  early  1920s  the  influence  of 
Plummer increased further the popularity of Lugol solu-
tion  among  clinicians.    In  1932,  physician  B.N.  Cohn47 
wrote: “… The widespread use of compound solution of 
iodine, USP, (for the reader’s information, that is Lugol 
solution)  is  the  result  of  a  paper  by  Plummer  and 
Boothby, published in that year (1923).  Since then com-
pound solution of iodine has been used by nearly every 
clinician.” 

With  the  availability  of  thyroid  extracts  in  the  early 
1900s  and  thyroid  hormones  in  the  1930s,  thyroidolo-
gists  started  using  these  preparations  in  patients  with 
iodine deficiency and simple goiter instead of the previ-
ously  used  inorganic  iodine/iodide  preparations.    The 
situation  was  aggravated  in  the  1930s  by  the  fact  that 
during  the  same  period,  the  public  was  relying  on  io-
dized  table  salt  instead  of  iodine/iodide  preparations 
from apothecaries for supplementation, due to the propa-
ganda favoring the use of iodized salt.44  The thyroidolo-
gists  assumed  that,  with  iodization  of  table  salt,  iodine 
deficiency  became  a  thing  of  the  past  because  of  the 
positive effect of iodized salt on the incidence of goiter.  
That  was  the  beginning  of  thyroid  fixation.    By  the 
1950s  most  physicians  neglected  the  rest  of  the  human 
body, in terms of sufficiency for iodine, and forgot that 
their  predecessors  were  using  amounts  of  iodine/iodide 
two  orders  of  magnitude  greater  than  the  amounts  pre-
sent in the average daily consumption of table salt.  This 
was mainly due to iodophobic publications appearing in 
the mid 1940s (discussed in Section IV) and the errone-
ous assumption that absence of goiter means iodine suf-
ficiency.    A  textbook  entitled  Diagnosis  and  Treatment 
of Diseases of the Thyroid, edited by Amy Rowland and 
published in 1932, contained chapters from 24 thyroidolo-
gists of that time.48  Although the most common cause of 
hypothyroidism  and  simple  goiter  worldwide  is  iodine 
deficiency,  the recommended  treatment  of  hypothyroid-
ism was summarized in two sentences, “The treatment of 
hypothyroidism  of  any  type  consists  merely  in  the  sub-
stitution  of  thyroid  extract  for  the  deficient  secretion.  
Any form of prepared gland or the active principle, thy-
roxin, may be used.”  However, not all physicians aban-
doned iodine/iodide, and many continued up to the pre-
sent  day  to  use  Lugol  solution  and  potassium  iodide  in 
the  treatment  of  iodine  deficiency  and  simple  goiter.  
Today, this is called alternative medicine, but 100 years 
ago  it  was  mainstream  medicine.    In  1921,  S.P.  Beebe 
stated,  “We  may  say  that  medical  treatment  of  simple 
goiter is contained in this one word — iodine.”49 

It is unfortunate that mainstream endocrinologists today 
do not share Beebe’s enthusiasm for iodine.  In the eighth 
edition of The Thyroid published in 2000, Brent and Lar-

sen50 wrote  the chapter  on the treatment of hypothyroid-
ism in the adult.  They stated, “The goal of treatment of 
hypothyroidism is to normalize thyroid status in periph-
eral  tissues,  whatever  the  cause  of  the  hypothyroidism.  
The usual approach is to give sufficient T4 to ameliorate 
all  symptoms  of  hypothyroidism  and,  in  patients  with 
primary  hypothyroidism,  to  reduce  serum  TSH  concen-
trations to within the normal range…”  In the battle royal 
for supremacy, T4 became the uncontested winner in the 
treatment  of  simple  goiter  and  hypothyroidism,  caused 
by  iodine  deficiency  and  goitrogens,  but  the  female  pa-
tients became the real losers with increasing prevalence of 
obesity, diabetes, hypertension, and cancers of the breast 
and thyroid glands.30  What happened to inorganic, non-
radioactive iodine/iodide?   Don’t they know that iodine 
deficiency  in  women  predisposed  them  to  breast  can-
cer,30  and  that  giving  T4  to  iodine-deficient  women  in-
creases further their risk for breast cancer?51 

IV.  The Use of Inorganic, Non-radioactive 
Iodine/Iodide in Graves’ Disease 
Since Graves’ disease represents up to 90% of hyperthy-
roidism,52  we  will  limit  our  discussion  to  Graves’  dis-
ease, called by different names in different publications:  
exophthalmic goiter or goitre, hyperthyroidism, and toxic 
goiter.   

Iodine was used in the treatment of toxic goiter as early 
as 1840 by Von Basedow53 and in 1854 by Stokes.54  In 
1863,  Trousseau  inadvertently  used  tincture  of  iodine 
successfully in a patient with exophthalmic goiter.55  “In 
the course of October, 1863, I was consulted by a young 
married  lady,  who  habitually  resides in  Paris.    She  was 
suffering  from  subacute  exophthalmic  goiter…  I  still 
found her heart beat at the rate of 140 to 150 times in the 
minute…  I  wished  to  administer  at  the  same  time  tinc-
ture of digitalis, but preoccupied with the idea that there 
would be some danger in giving iodin, I wrote iodin in-
stead of digitalis, so that the patient took from 15 to 20 
drops of tincture of iodin a day for a fortnight.  (For the 
reader’s  information,  “tincture  of  iodin”  is  a  10%  solu-
tion  of  iodine  in  95%  ethanol.    The  daily  amount  in-
gested  was  75-100  mg).    When  she  then  came  back  to 
me, her pulse was only 90.  I found out my mistake, and 
I  substituted  tincture  of  digitalis  for  that  of  iodin,  but, 
after  another  fortnight,  the  pulse  had  again  gone  up  to 
150, so that I at once returned to the iodin.”  Trousseau 
had  the  distinction  of  performing  the  first  double-blind 
study  of  iodine  in  a  cohort  of  one  patient  with  Graves’ 
disease.  He also achieved remission of Graves’ disease 
with prolonged administration of potassium iodide.56 

Thompson, et al,57 in a 1930 publication, quoted several 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

23 

 
 
 
 
 
authors  in  the  late  1800s  and  early  1900s  who  used 
Lugol  solution  alone  successfully  in  Graves’  disease, 
with  complete  remission  of  the  disease,  eliminating  the 
need for surgery.  Destruction of the thyroid gland with 
goitrogens  and  radioiodide  was  fortunately  not  then 
available  for  the  management  of  Graves’  disease.    Pro-
fessor Kocher came on the scene in the early 1900s and 
had  an  adverse  iodophobic  effect  on  the  treatment  of 
Graves’  disease.    Professor  Theodore  Kocher  carried  a 
lot  of  weight,  being  the  recipient  of  the  Nobel  Prize  in 
Medicine  and  Physiology  in  1909,  for  his  work  on 
“thyroid  surgery,”  the  only  Nobel  Prize  assigned  to  re-
search on the thyroid gland.  He was against the use of 
iodine/iodide  in  exophthalmic  goiter  and  all  forms  of 
hyperthyroidism.58,59 

Cowell and Mellanby in their 1925 publication60 give a 
glimpse  of  Kocher’s  influence  over  the  thyroidologists 
of  that  time,  bordering  on  intimidation,  “Kocher  taught 
that  the  administration  of  potassium  iodide  must  never 
be carried out in exophthalmic goiter, and on the whole, 
this advice has been taken.  As evidence of this fact may 
be mentioned the discussion on the treatment of exoph-
thalmic goiter at the Royal Society of Medicine in 1923.  
No  speaker  mentioned  iodine  or  any  preparation  of  io-
dine  as  being  of  any  value  in  the  treatment  of  the  dis-
ease, and it can be inferred that therapy involving the use 
of iodine has been deliberately avoided.” 

The influence of Kocher divided thyroidologists into two 
schools:  the iodine/iodide school which favored the use 
of Lugol solution first and then adding surgery later for 
the patients not responding to this approach alone, while 
continuing  the  iodine/iodide  supplementation;  and  the 
surgical  school  discouraged  the  use  of  iodine/iodide, 
prior  to  and  post  surgery.    In  1927,  DeCourcy61  stated, 
“That the administration of iodine prior to operation for 
exophthalmic  goiter  controls  the  symptoms,  lowers  the 
basal metabolic rate and lessens the hazards of operation, 
is  no  longer  questioned.   This teaching,  however,  is  di-
rectly contrary to that of only a few years ago.  Formerly 
the  surgical  school  led  by  Kocher  opposed  the  use  of 
iodine  in  any  form  of  Graves’  disease,  holding  that  it 
increases the severity of the symptoms and may, in fact, 
be  responsible  for  the  development  of  exophthalmic 
from  simple  goiter.”      In  the  same  publication,  De-
Courcy’s own experience revealed that out of 30 cases of 
exophthalmic  goiter  in  children,  Lugol  solution  5-10 
drops (30-60 mg) three times a day “made operation un-
necessary” in 11 cases.  That is a 36% success rate. 

Some brave souls defied Kocher’s moratorium and con-
tinued  to  use  inorganic  iodine/iodide  successfully  in 
Graves’ disease.  Retrospectively, Kocher’s stand against 

inorganic  iodine/iodide  in  Graves’  disease  proved  to  be 
the main cause of the high rate of pre- and post-operative 
mortality,  following  thyroidectomy.    In  1924,  Plummer 
and  Boothby  from  the  Mayo  Clinic62,63  reported  their 
experience  with  600  cases  of  Graves’  disease,  who  re-
ceived  Lugol  solution  for  several  days  pre-operatively 
and post-operatively, resulting in zero medical mortality, 
“In the Mayo clinic we now give 10 minims of Lugol’s 
solution as a routine three times a day for at least seven 
days previous to a thyroidectomy.  (For the reader’s in-
formation,  one  minim  is  one  drop  of  Lugol,  containing 
6.25 mg of total elemental iodine. The daily amount was 
about 180 mg.)  The solution is administered for a longer 
period  to  patients  who  have  been  in  a  particularly  bad 
condition  and  are  at  the  end  of  this  period  rapidly  im-
proving.  To patients in a crisis or near-crisis, 50 minims 
are given during the first two or three hours, by mouth if 
it can be retained, otherwise by rectum.  If the patient is 
in a crisis, this is followed by 50 minims during the fol-
lowing forenoon.  To the patients having so-called post-
operative recurrences that can be controlled are given 10 
minims  of  the  solution  daily  over  an  indefinite  period.  
This  period is  generally  determined  by  stopping  the  io-
din at intervals of a few weeks, and noting the patient’s 
condition  at  the  end  of  10  days.    If  there  is  any  recur-
rence of hyperthyroidism, the administration of iodine is 
again resumed… From January 1 to September 1, 1924, 
from 600 to 700 new cases of exophthalmic goiter were 
observed in the Clinic.  During this period there were no 
medical death.” 

In 1925, Frank H. Lahey64 from the Lahey Clinic in Bos-
ton  reported  his  experience  with  Lugol  solution  in 
Graves’  disease.    “The  introduction  of  Lugol’s  solution 
by Dr. Henry S. Plummer as a method of preparation for 
operation in exophthalmic goiter marks a step of forward 
progress  in the  surgical  management  of this  disease.    It 
has  practically  eliminated  preliminary  pole  ligation  in 
our Clinic and has made it possible to complete the op-
eration  of  subtotal  thyroidectomy  in  one  stage  upon  a 
great majority of our patients.  It has saved for us many 
of those delirious and desperately toxic cases which pre-
viously  died  before  any  operation  could  be  done  upon 
them, and it has almost completely done away with post-
operative  thyroid  reactions.    It  has  been  a  real  boon  to 
the  patient  suffering  from  exophthalmic  goiter  or  pri-
mary hyperthyroidism.”   

Thompson,  et  al57  published  the  results  obtained  in  24 
patients  with  exophthalmic  goiter  treated  with  Lugol 
solution alone without surgery, using a daily dose of one 
drop.  As mentioned previously, goitrogens and radioio-
dide  were  not available  for  use  in  Graves’  disease  until 
(Continued on next page) 

24 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
 
the  mid  1940s,  coincident with  the  appearance  of iodo-
phobic publications  by  the  same  authors  who  promoted 
the goitrogens as an alternative to Lugol solution in the 
management of Graves’ disease.  Thompson, et al stated:   
“Twenty-four patients with exophthalmic goiter (14 mild 
and  10  severe  or  moderately  severe  cases)  have  been 
treated  in  this  clinic  with  iodine  alone,  either  continu-
ously or intermittently for periods ranging from one and 
one-half months to three years.  The period of treatment 
was  a  year or  more  in  13 instances.   With three  excep-
tions (all unsatisfactory responses to iodine) the patients 
pursued their daily work throughout the period of obser-
vation,  thus  eliminating  the  effect  of  rest.”    That  is  an 
88% success rate. 

S.P. Beebe from New York reported favorably in 1921, 
on  the  use  of  Lugol  solution  in  hyperthyroid  forms  of 
goiter,49  based  on  his  experience  over  a  period  of  10 
years,  which  did  not  confirm  Kocher’s  iodophobic  atti-
tude, “In going over these statements in the literature, it 
seems probable that the actual basis for the conclusions 
has  been  theoretical  considerations  and  preconceived 
notions rather than careful clinical observations... In this 
writer’s  experience  iodine  is  one  of  the  most  valuable 
therapeutic agents we have in the treatment of the hyper-
thyroid  forms  of  goiter.    As  in  the  case  of  any  potent 
drug,  injury  can  be  done  with  it.    So  can  we  do  injury 
with digitalis and salvarsan.  During the last 10 years the 
writer  has  treated  a  large  number  of  cases  of  hyperthy-
roidism,  and  with  most  of  them  the  administration  of 
iodine has been a part of the treatment.  There is no dan-
ger  in  so  doing  if  the  dose  is  properly  regulated.    The 
extreme sensitiveness described by some writers is a rare 
event.  If the dose is properly regulated there need be no 
fear of iodism or iodine Basedowism.”   

Starr,  et  al65  from  the  Massachusetts  General  Hospital 
used 15 drops (90 mg) of  Lugol daily for the treatment 
of  exophthalmic  goiter,  with  a 92%  success  rate,  elimi-
nating  the  need  for  surgery.    “Of  these  25  cases,  20 
(80%)  responded  to  iodin  by  a  more  or  less  extensive 
remission  of  the  disease.    Of  these  20,  12  (48%)  re-
sponded with the acute iodine remission resembling the 
effect  produced  by  subtotal  thyroidectomy.    In  the  re-
maining  eight  (32%)  the  remission  occurred,  but  was 
less extensive.  In five unsuccessful cases (20%) two of 
the patients were pregnant, and one had cardiac decom-
pensation.  If these are omitted from the calculation, io-
dine administration  was  successful  in  20 of  23,  or  92%  
of our hospital cases.”   

A cursory review of the literature suggests that the use of 
Lugol  solution  in  Graves’  disease,  the  preferred  ap-
proach  by  thyroidologists  of  that  time,  resulted  in  a 

higher  success  rate  with  fewer  complications  than  the 
use of iodine and iodide alone.45,57,60-66  The daily amount 
of Lugol solution used in Graves’ disease ranged from one 
drop (6.25 mg) to 30 drops (180 mg).  A complete nutri-
tional  program  in  our  experience  improved  further  the 
response to orthoiodosupplementation in Graves’ disease 
and other thyroid disorders. 

No serious attempt was made by physicians of the early 
1900s  to  incorporate  a  complete  nutritional  program 
with  Lugol  supplementation  in  the  management  of  thy-
roid disorders.  The reason is that not much was known 
about vitamins, minerals, and essential trace elements at 
that  time.    Today,  the  importance  of  good  nutrition  in 
overall well-being is commonly accepted, and more and 
more  publications  are  emphasizing  the  interaction  be-
tween micronutrients in their overall effects on biologi-
cal  systems.    We  have  incorporated  a  total  nutritional 
program  with  orthoiodosupplementation,  emphasizing 
magnesium instead of calcium (discussed further in Sec-
tion  VII).    The  effect  of  this  nutritional  program  with 
orthoiodosupplementation  on  thyroid  function  tests  in  a 
40-year-old  female  patient  with  severe  hyperthyroidism 
is displayed in Table 3.   

She  was  a  classic  case  of  Graves’  disease  with  exoph-
thalmia.    After  researching  the  medical  literature,  she 
refused treatment with radioiodides, goitrogens and sur-
gery.  She was placed on the nutritional program, includ-
ing 1,200 mg of magnesium/day for one month prior to 
iodine  supplementation,  followed  by  the  same  program 
with  the  addition  of  12.5  mg  elemental  iodine  (1  tablet 
Iodoral®)  daily  afterward.    TSH  was  undetectable  at 
<0.01  µU/ml.    Total  T4  was  18  µg/dL;  Total  T3  442 
ng/dL;  Free  T4  =  5  ng/dL.    Following  one  month  on  a 
high  magnesium  program,  she  stated  she  felt  calmer, 
with  less  palpitation,  could  sleep  better.    The  burning, 
irritation,  and  lacrimation  of  the  eyes  improved.    TSH 
remained undetectable at 0.03 µU/ml; Total T4 dropped 
to 16 µg/dL and Total T3 from 442 to 299 ng/dL.  Free 
T4  did  not  change  appreciably.    After  the  first  week  on 
iodine/iodide at 12.5 mg/day, she noticed a clearer mind 
with improved cognition.  Following one month on this 
program, she slept better and was better organized with 
improved  social  activities.    Her  palpitation  decreased 
markedly with normal pulse rates.  Serum TSH became 
normal at 2.3 µU/ml; Total T4, Total T3 and Free T4 were 
all within the normal range at 8.0 µg/dL, 195 ng/dL, and 
1.2  ng/dL.    She  continued  to  improve.    After  three 
months  on  the  same  program,  TSH  was  not  measured, 
but Total T4, Total T3  and  Free  T4  remained  within  the 
normal range (Table 3).  She experienced some diarrhea 
following  four  months  on  magnesium  at  1,200  µg/day, 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
and the daily amount was decreased to 600 mg/day.  As 
of  this  writing,  the  thyroid  function  tests  remained 
within  the  normal  range;  she  has  no  exophthalmia;  she 
gained  16  pounds;  and  her  social  activities  have  im-
proved  to  the  point  of  matrimony.    She  praises  God 
every  day  for  saving  her  thyroid  gland  and  making  her 
healthy again. 

Published studies on the safe and effective use of Lugol 
solution  in  Graves’  disease  mysteriously  disappeared 
during the 1940s and afterward, concurrent with the ap-
pearance  of  iodophobic  publications  and  the  promotion 
of  goitrogens  as  an  alternative  to  Lugol  solution  in  the 
management  of  Graves’  disease.    (See  Table  4.)    Intro-
duced in 1943 by E.B. Astwood67 for the management of 
Graves’  disease  in  the  forms  of  thiourea  and  thiouracil, 
these goitrogens evolved into more powerful ones,68 and 
eventually  the  thionamides:    methimazole,  carbimazole, 
and propylthiouracil.  These goitrogens rapidly replaced 
inorganic  iodine/iodide  in  the  management  of  Graves’ 
disease.  The synchronization of iodophobic publications 
with  the  introduction  of  goitrogens  to replace  inorganic 
iodine/iodide  (Table  4)  was  a  brilliant  move,  and  it 
worked  wonderfully.    Obviously,  no  one  was  awake  to 
ask  questions.    In  1953,  when  Godley  and  Stanbury69 
introduced  a  new  goitrogen,  potassium  perchlorate,  in 
the  treatment  of  hyperthyroidism,  they  acknowledged 
that  the  thiionamides  were  used  widely  in  Graves’  dis-
ease, instead of inorganic iodine/iodide.  “At the present 
time  propylthiouracil,  methylthiouracil  and  1-methyl-2-
mercaptoimidazole  (methimazole)  are  widely  employed 
in the preparation of thyrotoxic patients for surgery, and 
to a lesser extent in the chronic control of the overactive 
thyroid  gland  (5).”    This  new  goitrogen,  that  is  potas-
sium perchlorate, was so toxic that it was removed from 
circulation shortly after its introduction.  Reintroduction 
of this goitrogen is currently being attempted by lower-

Table 3 

ing the recommended dosage.70 
Astwood and his associates reported very high remission 
rates  in  Graves’  disease  with  the  use  of  goitrogens, 
which  mislead  thyroidologists  and  encouraged  them  to 
use  these  drugs  instead  of  inorganic  iodine/iodide.    In 
two  studies  published  in  1953  and  1966,  his  teams  re-
ported  a  remission  rate  of  50-75%.71,72    However,  his 
findings could not be reproduced by others.  Wartofsky73 
in  1973,  and  Reynolds  and  Kotchen74 in  1979,  observed 
much lower remission rates of 11-16%.  Increased inges-
tion of iodine/iodide by the patients was blamed by War-
tofsky for the low success rate.  Wartofsky’s study was 
done at a time when one slice of bread contained the full 
RDA for iodine.  In an attempt to improve success rate 
with goitrogens, patients were told to limit their intake of 
iodine, which discouraged further its use by the patients.  
Wartofsky, et al73 failed to realize that iodization of bak-
ery  products  started  several  years  before  the  second 
study  by  Astwood,  et  al72  published  in  1966,  which re-
ported a very high success rate.  In 1965, London, et al25 
reported  an  estimated  iodine  intake  of  1  mg/day  with 
726  µg  coming  from  bakery  products.    In  the  end,  one 
concludes  that  Astwood’s  optimistic  reports  on  the  use 
of goitrogens in Graves’ disease could not be reproduced 
by  others.    Since  the  word  “goitrogens”  implies  goiter-
causing  drugs,  Astwood  called  them  antithyroid  drugs.  
So,  instead  of  normalizing  thyroid  function  physiologi-
inorganic,  non-
cally  with  sufficient  amounts  of 
radioactive  iodine/iodide,  thyroidologists  became  de-
structive  in  their  approach  with  goitrogens  and  radioio-
dide,  resulting  in  hypothyroidism  in  the  majority  of 
those  unfortunate  patients  who  eventually  join  the  ever 
increasing T4 consuming population.   

In  the  1980s,  thyroidologists  in  the  US  decreased  their 
use  of  goitrogens  in  Graves’  disease  due  to  low  remis-
(Continued on next page) 

Effect of Supplementation with a Complete Nutritional Program 
Combined with Iodine/Iodide at 12.5 mg/day on Thyroid Function Tests  
in a 40-year-old Female Patient with Graves’ Disease 

I.  Before Supplementation 
TSH < 0.01 µU/ml 
Total T4 = 18 µg/dL 
Total T3 = 442 ng/dL 
Free T4 = 5 ng/dL 

II.  After One Month on Complete Nutritional 
      Supplementation with 1,200 mg Magnesium/day 

TSH < 0.03 µU/ml 
Total T4 = 16 µg/dL 
Total T3 = 299 ng/dL 
Free T4 = 5.6 ng/dL 

III.  After One Month on Iodoral® — 1 Tablet/Day 

TSH = 2.3 µU/ml 
Total T4 = 8.0 µg/dL 
Total T3 = 195 ng/dL 
Free T4 = 1.2 ng/dL 

IV.  After Three Months on Iodoral® — 1 Tablet/Day 

TSH not measured 
Total T4 = 9.0 µg/dL 
Total T3 = 156 ng/dL 
Free T4 = 1.6 ng/dL 

26 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 4 

Synchronization of Iodophobic Publications with the Promotion of Goitrogens 
as an Alternative to Inorganic Non-radioactive Iodine/Iodide 

Iodophobic Publications 

Iorganic iodide blocks synthesis of thyroid hormones in vitro using sheep thyroid. 

1944 
Morton ME, Chaikoff IL, and Rosenfled S.  “Inhibiting effect of inorganic iodide on the formation in vitro of thyropine and 
diiodotyrosine by surviving thyroid tissue.”  J Biol Chem, 1944; 154:381. 

1948 
Inorganic iodide blocks synthesis of thyroid hormones in vivo, (rats).  Known as the Wolff-Chaikoff Effect. 
Wolff J and Chaikoff IL.  “Plasma inorganic iodide as a homeostatic regulator of thyroid function.”  J Biol Chem, 1948; 174:555-
564. 

The Wolff Chaikoff Effect “extended to humans.” 

1949 
Stanley MM.  “The direct estimation of the rate of thyroid hormone formation in man.  The effect of the iodide ion on thyroid iodine 
utilization.”  J Clin Endocr, 1949; 9:941-954. 

Publictions testing and promotin goitrogens in the treatment of Graves’ disease 

1943 
Astwood EB.  “Treatment of hyperthyroid with thiourea and thiouracil.”  JAMA, 1943; 122:78-81. 

Introduction of goitrogens in the treatment of Graves’ disease by EB Astwood. 

1944  Goitrogens block the conversion of radioactive inorganic iodide to thyroxine — in vitro. 
Franklin AL, Chaikoff IL, and Lerner SR.  “The influence of goitrogenic substances on the conversion in vitro of inorganic iodide to 
thyroxine and diiodotyrosine by thyroid tissue with radioactive iodine as indicator.”  J Biol Chem, 1944; 153:151-162. 

1946  Goitrogens block the uptake of radioiodide by the thyroid gland in vivo (rats). 
Wolff J, Chaikoff IL, et al.  “The disturbance of iodine metabolism produced by thiocyanate:  The mechanism of its goitrogenic 
action with radioactive iodine as indicator.”  Endocrinology, 1946; 39:140-148. 

Evaluation of several goitrogens in normal subjects using radioiodide as a marker. 

1947 
Stanley MM and Astwood EB.  “Determination of the relative activities of antithyroid compounds in man using radioactive iodine.”  
Endocrinology, 1947; 41:66-84. 

Evaluation of goitrogens in the treatment of Graves’ disease, tested in 2 groups of 34 and 30 patients, respectively. 
1949 
Stanley MM and Astwood EB.  “Notes and comments.  1-methyl-2-mercaptoinidazole:  An antithyroid compound highly active in 
man.”  Endocrinology, 1949;  44:588-589. 

sion  rate  and  side  effects  and  relied  more  and  more  on 
inorganic iodide, but unfortunately the wrong kind (i.e., 
the  radioactive  kind).    Thyroidologists  en  masse  joined 
the nuclear age.  In 1990, a survey by the American Thy-
roid  Association75  revealed  that  the  majority  of  their 
members  relied  predominantly  on  radioiodide,  with  the 
exception of the very young and the pregnant, whom the 
compassionate thyroidologists protected by giving them 
goitrogens!  Only 2% opted for surgery, 28% used goi-
trogens, and 70% joined the nuclear age.  There was no 
mention  of  inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine/iodide  as 
an  option.    In  the  last  edition  of  Werner  and  Ingbar’s 
The  Thyroid  published  in  2000,  D.S.  Cooper  wrote  the 
chapter  on  treatment  of  thyrotoxicosis:76    “This  chapter 
considers the three forms  of treatment of thyrotoxicosis 
—  antithyroid  drugs,  radioactive  iodine  (radioiodine), 
and  thyroidectomy  —  that  are  in  wide  use  now.”    In  a 
subsection entitled “Other drugs used in the treatment of 
thyrotoxicosis  caused  by  Graves’  disease,”  Cooper 

stated,  “The  effects  of  iodide  on  thyroid  function  are 
complex and are discussed in detail in the section on the 
effects  of  excess  iodide  in  Chapter  13.”    The  reader  is 
preconditioned  to  be  in  an  iodophobic  mode  when  he 
goes  to  Chapter  13,  an  ominous  number,  with  “excess 
iodide” in the title and where inorganic iodine/iodide is 
blamed  for  the  severe  side  effects  of  organic  iodine-
containing  drugs,  such  as  amiodarone,  and  is  called  “a 
pathogen.” 

the  unsuspecting 

Obviously, 
thyroidologist  relying 
solely  on  this  textbook  for  information  will  avoid  inor-
ganic  iodine/iodide  like  leprosy.    However,  if  he  is  in-
quisitive and searches the literature carefully, he may read 
the publication by Phillipou, et al,4 who studied the effect 
of  inorganic  iodide  on  thyroid  functions  and  compared 
his  results  with  the  effects  of  amiodarone,  “We  can, 
therefore,  conclude  that  the  effect  of  amiodarone,  ben-
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

27 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ziodarone, Na iopanate, and other iodine containing sub-
stances with similar effects is due to the entire molecule, 
and  not  to  the  iodine  liberated.    It  should  be  noted  that 
the cytotoxic effect of amiodarone in all cultures is also 
due to the entire molecule, and not to the iodine present 
in it.”  It is most amazing that no one so far has proposed 
the  use  of  inorganic,  non-radioactive  iodine/iodide  at  9 
mg/day in patients with cardiac arrhythmia.  Indeed, we 
have a zombified medical profession.  Case in point, pa-
tients are told to protect their thyroid gland from radio-
active  fallout  by  ingesting  inorganic,  non-radioactive 
iodide.    However,  the  same  patients,  if  diagnosed  with 
Graves’  disease,  are  told  to  stop  taking  inorganic,  non-
radioactive  iodine/iodide  in  order  to  allow  the  largest 
concentration of radioactive iodide to penetrate their thy-
roid  gland,  a  destructive  dose  that  is!    Does  that  make 
any sense? 

V.  Hypo- and Hyperthyroidism Caused by Organic 
and Inorganic Forms of Stable Iodine/Iodide 
A  critical  evaluation  of  some  review  articles  on iodine-
induced  hypothyroidism  and  iodine-induced  hyperthy-
roidism reveals that in most cases, organic forms of io-
dine  are  involved.    However,  the  titles  of  those  articles 
suggest that the review is about inorganic iodine/iodide.  
For  example, in  the  latest published  review  on  “iodine-
induced hypothyroidism” by Markou, et al77 in 2001, the 
list  of  iodine-containing  products  causing  hypothyroid-
ism consisted predominantly of organic forms of iodine, 
such as amiodarone and radiology contrast agents.  The 
title of that review should have been “Drug-induced hy-
pothyroidism.”  In 1984, Leger, et al78 reported 85 cases 
of  “iodine-induced  thyrotoxicosis.”    Amiodarone  alone 
accounted  for  50%  of  the  cases.    All  the  patients  re-
ceived  organic  forms  of  iodine-containing  drugs.    The 
title of that review should have been “Drug-induced hy-
perthyroidism.” 

In  1983,  Fradkin  and  Wolff79  published  a  review  on 
“iodide-induced  thyrotoxicosis.”    Since  organic  forms 
contain iodine, not iodide, using “iodide” in the title im-
plies we are dealing with the inorganic forms.  However, 
in  the  first  paragraph  of  that  review,  we  read,  “Three 
recent events have revived interest in this side reaction to 
iodide:    alarming  reports  from  Germany  regarding  the 
dangers to the thyroid gland of radiographic contrast me-
dia;  the  widespread  use  of  the  iodine-containing  drug, 
amiodarone;  and  the  proposed  use  of  potassium  iodide 
(KI)  (100-200  mg/day)  as  the  most  effective  protective 
measure  against  released  radioactive  iodine  isotopes af-
ter  loss  of  coolant  accidents  in  nuclear  reactors.”    This 
review was written before the drug amiodarone was ap-
proved for use in the US, after causing havoc in Europe.  
Amiodarone  contains  organic  iodine.    The  use  of  inor-

ganic iodine/iodide at 9 mg/day was never tested in simi-
lar  patients  as  an  alternative  to  amiodarone,  a  drug  re-
leasing about 9 mg iodine per day.  It would not be sur-
prising  if  9  mg  inorganic  iodine/iodide/day  resulted  in 
the  beneficial  effects  without  the  severe  side  effects.  
Radiographic  contrast  media  contains  organic  iodine.  
Last,  the  authors  mentioned  potassium  iodide  (KI)  at  a 
daily  dose  of  100-200  mg,  which  is  the  only  inorganic 
form  of  iodide  included  in  the  list  of  agents  causing 
“iodide-induced  thyrotoxicosis.”    However,  in  the same 
review, the authors stated, “Although there are scattered 
case  reports  of  IIT  (iodide-induced  thyrotoxicosis)  after 
the  use  of  KI,  these  must  be  considered  in  the  light  of 
over  108 tablets  of  KI  prescribed annually  in this  coun-
try.    Reports  of  experience  with  KI  (1.6-6.4  g/day)  in 
large series of pulmonary patients revealed no hyperthy-
roidism in 2,404 and 502 patients.”  Nevertheless, when 
iodine  is  incorporated  into  drugs,  inorganic  iodide  is 
blamed for the side effects.  “Hyperthyroidism occurring 
after administration of iodine-containing drugs has been 
ascribed  to  iodide.”79    The  thyrotoxicosis  induced  by 
iodine-containing  drugs  is  blamed  on  inorganic  iodide 
even  though  the  use  of  inorganic  iodide  alone  was  not 
associated with thyrotoxicosis in the two studies referred 
to.  Does that make any sense?  Iodophobia, induced by 
whatever  motivation,  causes  an  altered  state  of  con-
sciousness, which makes doublespeak and contradictory 
statements acceptable. 

There  is  a  great  need  to  educate  physicians  about  the 
great  difference  between  organic  iodine  and  inorganic 
iodine/iodide.    One  good  example  to  demonstrate  this 
difference is the thyroid hormones T4 and T3.  They are 
organic  iodine-containing  substances  that  occur  natu-
rally.  Their effects are well described and distinctly dif-
ferent  from  the  effects  of  inorganic  iodine/iodide.    No 
physician  has  ever  attributed  the  effects  of  thyroid  hor-
mones to inorganic iodine/iodide.  So, why is it so hard 
for them to extrapolate this observation to organic iodine 
containing drugs?  Here again, the answer may be in two 
symptoms  of  medical  iodophobia:    an  altered  state  of 
consciousness and split personality, allowing a complete 
dissociation  in  their  thinking  process  between  the  or-
ganic  iodine-containing  thyroid  hormones  and  the  or-
ganic iodine containing drugs. 

VI. Iodization of Salt and Chronic Autoimmune 
Thyroiditis:  A Proposed Pathophysiology 
In  several  communities  worldwide,  an  increased  inci-
dence  of  chronic  autoimmune  thyroiditis  was  reported 
following implementation of iodization of sodium chlo-
ride.80    In  areas  of  the  US  where  this  relationship  has 
been studied, mainly in the Great Lakes Region, a simi-
(Continued on next page) 

28 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
lar  trend  was  reported.    In  1966  and  1968,  Weaver,  et 
al81,82 from Ann Arbor, Michigan reported, “The salient 
histopathological feature of the thyroid glands, removed 
at operation in a five-year period before iodine prophy-
laxis  (1915-1920),  was  the  paucity  of  lymphocytes  in 
their parenchyma, and, more importantly, the absence of 
thyroiditis  of  any  form…  It  should  be  emphasized  that 
the  thyroid  glands  prior  to  the  use  of  iodized  salt  were 
devoid of lymphocytes, and nodular colloid goiters with 
dense lymphocytic infiltrates were found after the intro-
duction of iodized salt in 1924.”  It is of interest to note 
that  prior  to  iodization  of  salt,  autoimmune  thyroiditis 
was almost non-existent in the US, although Lugol solu-
tion  and  potassium  iodide  were  used  extensively  in 
medical  practice  in  amounts  two  orders  of  magnitude 
greater than the average daily amount ingested from io-
dized  salt.    This  suggests  that  inadequate  iodide  intake 
aggravated  by  goitrogens,  not  excess  iodide,  was  the 
cause  of  this  condition.    To  be  discussed  later,  autoim-
mune  thyroiditis cannot  be  induced  by  inorganic  iodide 
in  laboratory  animals  unless  combined  with  goitrogens, 
therefore inducing iodine deficiency. 

Furszyfer, et al83 from the Mayo Clinic studied the aver-
age  annual  incidence  of  Hashimoto’s  thyroiditis  among 
women of Olmsted County, Minnesota during three con-
secutive periods covering 33 years of observation, from 
1935 to 1967.  They found the incidence to be higher in 
women  40  years  and  older  versus  women  39  years  and 
less.    However,  in  both  groups  there  was  a  progressive 
increase in the incidence of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis over 
time.    During  the  three  periods  evaluated,  that  is  1935-
1944,  1945-1954,  and  1955-1967,  the  average  annual 
incidence  of  Hashimoto’s  per  100,000  population  was 
2.1,  17.9,  and  54.1  for  women  39  years  and  less.    For 
women 40 years and older, the average annual incidence 
over  the  same  three  periods  was  16.4,  27.4,  and  94.1.  
The authors commented, “From this study it appears that 
there has been an increase in the incidence rate of Hashi-
moto’s thyroiditis in Olmsted County between 1935 and 
1967…  One  of  the  more  attractive  hypotheses  with  re-
spect to the change in the incidence of Hashimoto’s thy-
roiditis  (and  perhaps  other  thyroid  disorders)  is  that  in-
creased ingestion of iodide (For the reader’s information, 
they are talking about iodization of salt) triggers the dis-
ease, but obviously, this is not the only factor to be con-
sidered in its pathogenesis.” 

Doctor  Hashimoto’s  name  became  a  household  word 
thanks  to  four  thyroid  glands.    In  1912,  pathologist  H. 
Hashimoto  published  in  a  German  medical  journal  and 
in  German,84  his  histological  findings  in  four  thyroid 
glands  removed  at  surgery:    numerous  lymphoid  folli-
cles,  extensive  connective  tissue  formation,  diffuse 

round cell infiltration, and significant changes of the aci-
nar epithelium.  He called this pathology of the thyroid 
“struma lymphomatosa.”  At the time of this publication, 
autoimmune  thyroiditis  was  not  observed  in  the  US 
population until the iodization of salt.  Hashimoto’s thy-
roiditis  is  now  classified  as  goitrous  autoimmune  thy-
roiditis  because  the  gland  is  enlarged,  in  distinction  to 
atrophic  autoimmune  thyroiditis  where  atrophy  and  fi-
brosis  are  predominant.    Both  conditions  are  chronic, 
progressing over time to hypothyroidism in a significant 
percentage  of  patients.71,81    It  is  important  to  point  out 
that the Mayo Clinic study started 10-15 years after im-
plementation of iodization of salt in the area.  Therefore, 
even  during  the  first  decade  of  observation,  the  preva-
lence of autoimmune thyroiditis was already significant.  
Again, it must be emphasized that prior to the implemen-
tation  of  iodized  salt  as  observed  by  Weaver,  et  al,81,82 
this  pathology  of  the  thyroid  gland  was  not  reported  in 
the  US,  even  though  the  Lugol  solution  and  potassium 
iodide were used extensively in medical practice at that 
time  in  daily  amount  two  orders  of  magnitude  greater 
than the average intake of iodide from table salt. 

The  mechanism  by  which  iodide  induces  autoimmune 
thyroiditis  is  poorly  understood.    Experimentally  in-
duced  autoimmune  thyroiditis  in  laboratory  animals  by 
acutely  administered  iodide  required  the  use  of  antithy-
roid  drugs,  essentially  goitrogens,  to  produce  these  ef-
fects.85-88  These goitrogens induced thyroid hyperplasia 
and  iodide  deficiency.    Antioxidants  either  reduced  or 
prevented the acute iodide-induced thyroiditis in chicks89 
and  mice.90   Bagchi,  et  al89  and  Many,  et  al90 proposed 
that  the  thyroid  injury  induced  by  the  combined  use  of 
iodide  and  goitrogens  occurs  through  the  generation  of 
reactive oxygen species.   

We would like to propose a mechanism for the oxidative 
damage  caused  by  low  levels  of  iodide  combined  with 
antithyroid  drugs:    inadequate  iodide  supply  to  the  thy-
roid  gland,  aggravated  by  goitrogens,  activates  the  thy-
roid  peroxydase  (TPO)  system  through  elevated  TSH, 
low  levels  of  iodinated  lipids,  and  high  cytosolic  free 
calcium,  resulting  in  excess  production  of  H2O2.    The 
excess H2O2 production is evidenced by the fact that anti-
oxidants  used  in  Bagchi’s  experiments  did  not  interfere 
with the oxidation and organification of iodide and there-
fore  neutralized  only  the  excess  oxidant.89    This  H2O2 
production  is  above  normal  due  to  a  deficient  feedback 
system caused by high cytosolic calcium resulting from 
magnesium deficiency and low levels of iodinated lipids 
which  requires  for  their  synthesis  iodide  levels  two  or-
ders  of  magnitude  greater  than  the  RDA  for  iodine.  
Once the low iodide supply is depleted, TPO in the pres-
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

29 

 
 
 
 
Iodination of Tg by TPO Using H2O2 and Iodide 

1.

Iodination of
thyrosine residues

2. Oxydative coupling 
of 2 iodothyrosine 
residues

TPO

Ca++

NADPH-oxydase
system

The  NADPH-oxydase  system  which  generates  H2O2  is  modulated  by  free  cytolic 
calcium and iodinated lipids. 

ence of H2O2 and organic substrate reverts to its peroxy-
dase function which is the primary function of haloper-
oxydases, causing oxidative damage to molecules near-
est  to  the  site  of  action:    TPO  and  the  substrate  thy-
roglobulin (Tg).  Oxydized TPO and Tg elicit an auto-
immune  reaction  with  production  of  antibodies  against 
these  altered  proteins  with  subsequent  damage  to  the 
apical  membrane  of  the  thyroid  cells,  resulting  in  the 
lymphocytic  infiltration  and  in  the  clinical  manifesta-
tions of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis.  In laboratory animals 
prone to autoimmune thyroiditis, the genetic defect may 
be  in  the  production  of  H2O2  in  excess  of  what  is 
needed.  

+

-

Figure 1 

Iodinated
lipids

Tg + iodide + H2O2

The  iodination  of  thyrosine  residues  by  TPO  requires 
the  presence  of  Tg, 
H2O2, and iodide.  The 
supply  of  H2O2 comes 
from 
the  NADPH 
system.91  
oxydase 
This  system  is  inhib-
ited  by  certain  iodi-
nated  lipids92-95  and  is 
enhanced  by  cytosolic 
free  calcium  Ca++.89 
and vide infra    The  equa-
tion  for  organification 
of  iodide  by  TPO  is 
displayed  in  Figure  1, 
together with the feed-
back  system  control-
ling  the  production  of 
H2O2.  The logical deduction from this equation is that 
increased cytosolic free calcium will cause an excess of 
H2O2.  Increased levels of iodinated lipids, on the other 
hand,  would  limit the  production of  H2O2.   How  much 
iodide is required for the production of iodinated lipids?  
In  1976,  Rabinovitch,  et  al96  reported  their  results  re-
garding the effect of three levels of iodide supplementa-
tion on the production of iodinated lipids in the thyroid 
glands of dogs:  low iodide diet, normal iodide diet, and 
high iodine diet.  The dogs were kept on those diets for 
six weeks.  Iodinated lipids in the plasma membrane and 
in  the  cell  total  lipids  were  observed  only  in  the  dogs 
receiving the high iodide diet.  What about human sub-
jects?    In  1994,  Dugrillon,  et  al97  reported  for  the  first 
the  presence  of  5-hydroxy-6-iodo-  8,11,14-
time 
eicosatrienoic delta lactone (delta iodolactone) in a hu-
man  thyroid,  following  the  ingestion  of  15  mg  io-
dide/day  for  10  days  in  the  host.    It  was  the  first  time 
this  biologically  active  iodolipid  was isolated from  hu-
man thyroid glands.  The amount of iodide the host re-
ceived was 100 times the RDA, but it is the amount of 
iodine/iodide  we  recommended  for  orthoiodosupple-

mentation.30    Dugrillon,  et  al97  stated,  “These  results 
demonstrate  for  the  first  time  that  delta-iodo-lactone  is 
present in iodide-treated human thyroid.”   

Magnesium  deficiency,  which  is  prevalent  in  the  US 
population,  results  in  increased  levels  of  cytosolic  free 
calcium.98    Intracellular  free  calcium  levels  above  the 
normal range are cytotoxic causing calcification of mi-
tochondria and cell death.  The cell membrane possesses 
an ATP-dependant calcium pump that keeps intracellu-
lar levels  of  free ionized  calcium  within  narrow limits.  
This calcium pump is magnesium-dependent for normal 
function.    Magnesium  deficiency  results  in  a  defective 
calcium pump and intracellular accumulation of ionized 
calcium.    Inadequate  iodine/iodide  intake  below  or-

thoiodosupplementation  results  in  decreased  levels  of 
delta-iodo-lactone. 
  Combined  magnesium  and  io-
dine/iodide deficiency based on the concept of orthoio-
dosupplementation are the basic factors involved in the 
oxidative  damage  caused  by  excess  H2O2  and  reactive 
oxygen  species.    If  this  proposed  mechanism  is  valid, 
orthoiodosupplementation,30 combined with magnesium 
intake  between  800-1,200  mg/day,  a  daily  amount  this 
author recommended 21 years ago98 for magnesium suf-
ficiency,  should  reverse  autoimmune  thyroiditis.    This 
nutritional approach is also effective in Graves’ autoim-
mune thyroiditis as previously discussed.   

VII.  Implementation of Orthoiodosupplementation 
as Part of a Total Nutritional Program 
The thyroid gland, like the rest of the body needs ade-
quate  amounts  of  all  the  macro-  and  micronutrients  to 
function  optimally.    Ideally,  besides  orthoiodosupple-
mentation and magnesium in adequate amounts, a com-
plete  nutritional  program  would  be  most  appropriate 
since other essential nutrients are important for thyroid 
(Continued on next page) 

30 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
function  and  are  involved  in  overall  well-being.    Since 
thyroid disorders occur predominantly in women,30 it is 
appropriate to mention the beneficial effects of a magne-
sium-emphasized  nutritional  program  on  the  well-being 
of  women  suffering  from  premenstrual  tension  syn-
drome,  post-menopausal  osteoporosis,  and  fibromyal-
gia.99-103    This  nutritional  program,  combined  with  or-
thoiodosupplementation,  is  the  safest  of  the  options 
available to prevent and treat thyroid diseases in women.   

Radioiodide in the treatment of Graves’ disease induces 
hypothyroidism in 90% of patients within the first year, 
with a continuing rate of 2-3% per year thereafter.76  The 
use  of  radioiodide  in  the  treatment  of  Graves’  disease 
has  been  associated  with  leukemia  and  other  forms  of 
cancer.104   Fever and arthralgia are  reported  in  1-5%  of 
patients on goitrogens (antithyroid drugs).76  Patients on 
goitrogens  may  be  more  prone  to  infections  due  to  in-
adequate supply of iodide to leukocytes during phagocy-
tosis, discussed in the following paragraph.  Goitrogens 
can  induce  severe  hepatotoxicity,  requiring  liver  trans-
plantation and sometimes resulting in death.105 

A  totally  neglected  area  is  the  effect  of  goitrogens  on 
other  haloperoxydases,  such  as  myeloperoxydases,  in-
volved  in  the  defense  mechanism  against  infections.  
Myeloperoxydase is present in high concentrations in the 
granules  of  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  and  mono-
cytes.106    It  catalyses  the  oxidation  of  iodide,  bromide, 
and  chloride  in  the  presence  of  H2O2  to  yield  products 
that oxidize and halogenate microbial components.107,108  
Chloride, due to its high concentration in leukocytes109 is 
believed  to  be  the  main  halogen  used  by  myeloperoxy-
dase.    However,  leukocytes  have  the  ability  to  concen-
trate  iodide  300-fold  during  phagocytosis110  and  even 
deiodinate  thyroid  hormones  to  generate  inorganic  io-
dide  when  iodide  supply  is  inadequate.111    Incubated  in 
the  presence  of  10  µg  iodide/100  ml  of  incubation  me-
dia,  phagocytosing  leukocytes  concentrated  inorganic 
iodide 300-fold to achieve intracellular concentration of 
0.003% inorganic iodide.  Leukocyte proteins contained 
even  higher  concentrations  of  organic  iodine,  0.04%, 
that  is  a  4,000-fold  higher  concentration  of  iodine  than 
present  in  the  incubation  media.    Thyroxine  synthesis 
was  observed  during  phagocytosis  of  leukocytes,  when 
the iodide supply was adequate (10 µg/100 ml).110  How-
ever, in the absence of non-radioactive iodide, phagocy-
tosing human leukocytes metabolized thyroid hormones 
added to  the  incubation  media in  order to  generate free 
inorganic iodide.111  Klebanoff and Green111 commented 
that  iodide,  on  a  molar  basis,  was  much  more  effective 
than  chloride  in  the  antimicrobial  activity  of  myeloper-
oxydase of leukocytes and stated, “When the iodide sup-
ply  is  diminished,  the  concentration  of  chloride…  may 

be  adequate.”    These  authors  observed  a  significant  in-
terference  with  the  antimicrobial  activity  of  myeloper-
oxydase of leukocytes by antithyroid drugs (goitrogens). 

Based  on  our  previous  calculations,30  the  concentration 
of iodide used by Stole110 (i.e., 10 ug/100ml, roughly 10-
6  Molar)  is  equivalent  to  the  expected  serum  levels  of 
inorganic  iodide  in  patients  on  orthoiodosupplementa-
tion and also in mainland Japanese who consume an av-
erage daily amount of 13.8 mg of elemental iodine,30 the 
only  population  in  the  world  on  orthoiodosupplementa-
tion and one of the healthiest based on cancer statistics.30  
From  data  available  in  published  studies  regarding  the 
effect  of  increasing  amounts  of  iodide  on  serum  inor-
ganic  iodide  levels  at  steady  state  conditions,112,113  we 
have  calculated  the  expected  serum  levels  of  inorganic 
iodide  at  steady  state  conditions,  when  a  patient  is  on 
orthoiodosupplementation (Figure 2). 

It is of interest to note that a daily ingestion of 12.5 mg 
iodine/iodide resulted in serum inorganic iodide level of 
2 x 10-6 M, which is the serum level reported by Wolff-
Chaikoff,27 to cause inhibition of organic binding of io-
dine and therefore inhibition of synthesis of thyroid hor-
mones.    Since  this  amount  of  Lugol  solution  was  used 
safely by three generations of physicians for iodine sup-
plementation,  and  since  we  have  observed  that  patients 
reported optimal mental and physical performances on 3-
4 times that amount, we would like to propose a redefi-
nition of the Wolff-Chaikoff Effect as a beneficial effect 
on mental and physical performances. 

The  breakdown  of  thyroid  hormones  by  phagocytosing 
leukocytes  in  an  iodine-deficient  patient  could  explain 
the high incidence of hypothyroxinemia in patients with 
chronic  infections,  such  as  chronic  active  hepatitis.114  
Accelerated  thyroid  hormone  degradation  during  bacte-
rial  infection  has  been  reported  in  man115  and  rhesus 
monkeys.116,117  Such findings would not be expected in 
mainland  Japanese  and  in  patients  on  orthoiodosupple-
mentation because the calculated serum levels of iodide 
in those subjects would approximate the concentration of 
iodide in  Stole’s incubation  media.26,110   Wartofsky  and 
Burman114 in their review article on the “euthyroid sick 
syndrome”  wrote,  “This  review  will  address  the  effects 
of  nonthyroidal  illness  on  thyroid  function  and  attempt 
to  establish  guidelines  for  the  determination  as  to 
whether such patients are truly euthyroid or not.  Indeed, 
the ultimate question for the clinician often is whether to 
treat  the  individual  with  severe  nonthyroidal  illness  for 
low serum thyroxine (T4).” 

Although  the  recommended  treatment  in  such  cases 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

31 

 
 
 
 
 
 
would  obviously  be  the  administration  of  thyroid  hor-
mones,  it  would  be  more  physiological  to  implement 
orthoiodosupplementation in these patients since the thy-
roid  hormones  administered  to  the  iodine-deficient  pa-
tient will be deiodinated to generate free iodide.  So why 
not give them inorganic, non-radioactive iodine/iodide in 
the  form  of  orthoiodosupplementation?    Thyroid  hor-
mones  are  very  expensive  forms  of  the  element  iodine, 
which is what these patients really need to start with.   

The  concept  of  orthoiodosupplementation30  is  based  on 
the  self-evident  fact  that  the  whole  body,  not  just  the 
thyroid gland, needs iodine.  The whole body needs this 
essential  trace  element,  which  plays  different  roles  in 
different  organs  and  tissues.    In  order  to  assess  whole 
body sufficiency for iodine/iodide, a simple loading test 
was  developed,118  based  on  the  concept  that  the  more 
deficient a patient is in this nutrient, the greater the per-
centage  of  ingested  iodine/iodide  that  will  be  retained, 
the smaller the percentage excreted in the urine. 

During the late 1800s and early 1900s, orthoiodosupple-
mentation was administered with Lugol solution 0.1-0.3 
ml containing 12.5-37.5 mg of iodine/iodide.46  Because 
administration  of  Lugol  solution  is  not  very  accurate, 
may  stain  clothing,  has  an  unpleasant  taste,  and  causes 
gastric irritation, we decided to use a precisely quantified 
tablet  form  (Iodoral®)  containing  5  mg  iodine  and  7.5 
mg  iodide  as  the  potassium  salt.119    To  prevent  gastric 
irritation,  the  iodine/iodide  preparation  was  absorbed 

Figure 2 

into  a  colloidal  silica  excipient.    To  eliminate  the  un-
pleasant  taste  of  iodine,  the  tablets  were  coated  with  a 
thin film of pharmaceutical glaze.  Ten clinically euthy-
roid Caucasian women were evaluated before and three 
months  after  ingesting  a  tablet  daily.    The  evaluation 
included  thyroid  function  tests  and  assessments  of  thy-
roid volume by ultrasonometry.  The results suggest that 
this  form  and  amount  administered  daily  for  three 
months to euthyroid women had no detrimental effect on 
thyroid volume and functions. 

When tested in the loading test, one tablet was not suffi-
cient  to  distinguish  between  different  degrees  of  iodine 
deficiency because the interindividual variation was very 
small.    We  were  interested  in  a  loading  test  that  would 
result in 40-50% of the ingested dose excreted in the 24-
hour urine and also with a wide range of values in differ-
ent subjects.  For six subjects tested, the following per-
cent  dose  excreted  were  obtained,  expressed  as  mean 
±SD (range): one tablet = 22±1.2 (20-26); two tablets = 
23±2.8  (22-25);  three  tablets  =  25±12.3  (14-37).    An-
other group of six normal subjects on a similar Western 
diet  was  tested  with  four  tablets  and  the  values  were  = 
39±17.2 (14.2–66.0).  (See Figure 3) 

We  chose  four  tablets  for  the  loading  test.    Sufficiency 
of the whole human body for iodine/iodide was arbitrar-
ily  defined  as  90%  or  more  of  the  ingested  amount  ex-
creted in the 24-hour urine collection, using 50 mg of the 
(Continued on next page) 

Effect of Iodine/Iodide on Serum Inorganic Iodide Level at Equilibrium 

Population 
consuming this 
range of intake

USA Range

“Endocrinologist’s

excess”

Orthoiodo-
supplementation

Loading test

Range of daily 
intake as 
expectorant

Average daily intake
(mg iodine/iodide per day)

0.01

0.5

Expected serum level of 
inorganic iodide at 
equilibrium

10-8 M   (0.0013 PPM)

10-7 M   (0.013 PPM)

12.5

W-C Effect

2 x 10-6 M   (0.25 PPM)

37.5

50

1000.0
6000.0

6 x 10-6 M   (0.75 PPM)

8 x 10-6 M   (1 PPM)

2 x 10-4 M   (20 PPM)
1.2 x 10-3 M   (120 PPM)

 
 
 
 
iodine/iodide  preparation  (four  tablets).    Orthoiodosup-
plementation  with  one  tablet  a  day  required  up  to  18 
months  to  achieve  sufficiency  in  some  patients,  and  in 
others, sufficiency was not achieved even after two years 
of  supplementation  with  one  tablet/day.    With  3-4  tab-
lets/day, however, sufficiency was achieved within three 
months in most cases.  These data support the keen ob-
servations  of clinicians over the  past  century,  regarding 
the  amount  of  iodine/iodide  needed  for  iodine/iodide 
supplementation,  12.5-37.5  mg  elemental  iodine  from 
Lugol solution.   

Orthoiodosupplementation  increased  urinary  excretion 
of lead, cadmium, arsenic, aluminum, and mercury.  Uri-
nary bromide and fluoride levels increased markedly and 
proportionally  to  the  amount  of  iodine/iodide  ingested.  
At  three tablets a  day,  urinary  fluoride  and  bromide  in-
creased up to 20-fold, although the preloading test levels 
were not  elevated.120    Obesity  seems  to  increase  the re-
quirement  for  iodine/iodide,  and this  may  be  due to se-
questration of iodine by unsaturated fats.  So many fac-
tors affect the requirement of iodine/iodide that the best 
way to assess whole body sufficiency for this element is 
with the loading test.   

Orthoiodosupplementation  decreased  the  need  for  thy-
roid  hormones  in  patients on  these  hormones.    In  some 
cases, this occurred during the first months of orthoiodo-
supplementation.30    However, in a  patient  with  atrophic 
autoimmune  thyroiditis,  11  months  of  orthoiodosupple-

Figure 3 

mentation was required before decreasing the amount of 
thyroid  hormones.    A  54-year-old  female  patient  with 
atrophic autoimmune thyroiditis (thyroid volume by ultra-
sound = 2.8 ml) and elevated TPO Ab titers, on 150 µg 
of T4 was placed on orthoiodosupplementation with 3-4 
tablets/day.    The  presupplementation  loading  test  re-
vealed 23% iodide excreted.  After three months on or-
thoiodosupplementation,  her  loading  test  was  92%  of 
iodide  excreted.    Her  serum  T4  levels  progressively  in-
creased to reach above normal level (14.6 µg %; normal 
range 4.5–12) after 11 months on orthoiodosupplementa-
tion.  T4 supplementation was decreased from 150 µg to 
100  µg/day.    She  stated  that  since  on  orthoiodosupple-
mentation, she feels more energetic with a clearer mind 
and with an improved sense of well-being. 

If  indeed,  iodine  deficiency,  that  is iodine/iodide  intake 
below  orthoiodosupplementation  levels,  is  involved  in 
autoimmune thyroiditis, then diseases that are associated 
with  autoimmune  thyroiditis  may  also  be  caused  by  io-
dine deficiency.  In 1996, Giani, et al121 reported a sig-
nificant  association  of  breast  cancer  with  Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis.    When  100  consecutive  patients  with  breast 
cancer  were  compared  with  100  match  controls,  Hashi-
moto’s  thyroiditis  was  present  in  2%  of  the  control 
group  compared  with  13.7%  in  the  group  with  breast 
cancer.    Simple  goiter,  a  sign  of  iodine  deficiency,  was 
present in 11% of controls compared to 27.4% of the pa-
tients with breast cancer.  Diabetes may also be an iodine-
(Continued on next page) 

Mean Percent Excretion of Iodide in 24-hour Urine Collections with Increasing 
Amount of Iodine/Iodide Ingested in Six Normal Subjects on a Western Diet 

d
e
t
e
r
c
x
e

e
s
o
d

l
a
r
o
%
n
a
e
M

n
o
i
t
c
e
l
l

o
c

e
n
i
r
u
h
4
2
n
i

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

(14.2-66)

MEAN 

SD 

(    ) = Range 

(22-25)

(20-26)

(14-37)

1

2

3

4

Quantity of Iodoral® tablets used in loading test

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
deficiency disease.  Lindberg,  et  al122 compared 52 dia-
betic children (insulin-dependant) with 386 non-diabetic 
school children.  TPO antibodies were present in 6% of 
the  control  group, compared  with  38%  of diabetic  chil-
dren.    It  seems  like  thyroidologists  and  nutritionists 
missed  the  boat.    Such  a  simple,  safe, inexpensive  way 
to heal so many medical conditions!  An overview of the 
effects of orthoiodosupplementation on mental perform-
ance,  resistance  to  infections,  protection  of  the  thyroid 
gland against radioactive fallout, detoxification of heavy 
metals  and  of  the  toxic  halides  bromide  and  fluoride, 
suggests that orthoiodosupplementation may be the best 
and safest preventive measure against bioterrorism.  The 
corollary  then  would  be:    The  worst  form  of  domestic 
bioterrorism  is  the  dissemination  of  iodophobic  misin-
formation  in  order  to  discourage  the  use  of  orthoiodo-
supplementation. 

About the Author 

Guy  E.  Abraham,  MD,  is  a  former  Professor  of  obstet-
rics,  Gynecology  and  Endocrinology  at  the  UCLA 
School  of  Medicine.    Some  35  years  ago,  he  pioneered 
the development of assays to measure minute quantities 
of  steroid  hormones  in  biological  fluids.    He  has  been 
honored as follows:  General Diagnostic Award from the 
Canadian  Association  of  Clinical  Chemists,  1974;  the 
“Medaille  d’Honneur”  from  the  University  of  Liege, 
Belgium,  1976;  the  Senior  Investigator  Award  of  Phar-
macia, Sweden, 1980. 

The applications of Dr. Abraham’s techniques to a vari-
ety of female disorders have brought a notable improve-
ment to the understanding and management of these dis-
orders.  Twenty years ago, Dr. Abraham developed nu-
tritional programs for women with premenstrual tension 
syndrome and post menopausal osteoporosis.  They are 
now  the  most  commonly  used  dietary  programs  by 
American  obstetricians  and  gynecologists.    Dr.  Abra-
ham’s  current  research  interests  include  the  develop-
ment of assays for the measurement of iodide in biologi-
cal fluids and the application of this assay to the imple-
mentation of orthoiodosupplementation in medical prac-
tice. 

REFERENCES 

1)  Bernecker  C.    “Intermittent  therapy  with  potassium  iodide  in 
chronic obstructive disease of the airways.”  Acta Allerg, 1969; 
24:216. 

2)  National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements: 
Protection of the thyroid gland in the event of release of radioio-
dine.  NCRP Report No. 55, NCRP, Washington, DC, 1977. 
3)  Hercheimer H.  “Effect of iodide treatment on thyroid function.”  

NEJM, 1977; 297:171. 

4)  Phillippou  G,  Koutras  DA, Piperingos  G,  et  al.    “The  effect  of 

iodide  on  serum  thyroid  hormone  levels  in  normal  persons,  in 
hyperthyroid patients, and in hypothyroid patients on thyroxine 
replacement.”  Clin Endocr, 1992; 36:573-578. 

5)  Anonymous.    “Sur  un  nouvel  acide  forme  avec  la  substance 
decouverte par M. Courtois.”  Annales de Chimie, 1813; 88:311-
318. 

6)  Bertrand  G.    “Sur  l’emploi  favorable  du  manganese  comme 

engrais.”  Compt Rend Acad Sci, 1905; 141:1255-1257. 

7)  Marine D and Kimball OP.  “Prevention of simple goiter in man.” 

Arch Intern Med, 1920; 25:661. 

8)  Marine D.  “Prevention and treatment of simple goiter.  Atl Med 

J, 1923; 26:437-442. 

9)  Delange FM.  “Iodine Deficiency.”  In:  Werner & Ingbar’s The 
Thyroid.    Braverman  LE  and  Utiger  RD,  editors.    Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2000; 295-329. 

10)  Kendall EC.  “The isolation in crystalline form of the compound 
which occurs in the thyroid: its chemical nature and physiologic 
activity.”  JAMA, 1915; 64:2042-2043. 

11)  Harington  CR.    “Isolation  of  thyroxine  from  the  thyroid  gland.”  

Biochem Jour, 1926; 20:293-299. 

12)  Gross  J  and  Pitt-Rivers  R.    “Physiological  activity  of  3:5:3’  –L-

triiodothyronine.”  Lancet, 1952; 1:593. 

13)  Roche J, Lissitsky S, and Michel R.  “Sur la presence de triiodo-
thyronine dans la thyroglobuline.” Compt Rend Acad Sci, 1952; 
234:1228, 1952. 

14)  Kelly FC.  “Iodine in medicine and pharmacy since its discovery 

– 1811-1961.”  Proc R Soc Med, 1961; 54:831-836. 

15)  Braverman  LE.    “Iodine  and  the  thyroid:    33  years  of  study.”  

Thyroid, 1994; 4:351-352. 

16)  Hitchens AP.  “The emergency treatment of  water  for drinking 

purposes.”  Milit Sug, 1922; 51:657-662. 

17)  Freund  AP,  Thomas  WC,  Bird  ED,  et  al.    “Effect  of  iodinated 
water  supplies  on  thyroid  function.”    J  Clin  Endocr,  1966; 
26:619-624. 

18)  Byrd  OE,  Malkin  HM,  Reed  GB,  et  al.    “Safety  of  iodine  as  a 
disinfectant in swimming pools.”  Public Health Reports, 1963; 
78:393-397. 

19)  Thomas WC, Black AP, Freund G, et al.  “Iodine disinfection of 

water.”  Arch Environ Health, 1969; 19:124-128. 

20)  LeMar HJ, Georgitis WJ, and McDermott MT.  “Thyroid adap-
tation  to  chronic  tetraglycine  hydroperiodide  water  purification 
tablet use.”  J Clin Endocr & Metab, 1995; 80:220-223. 

21)  McMonigal KA, Braverman LE, Dunn JT, et al.  “Thyroid func-
tion  changes  related  to  use  of  iodinated  water  in  the  US  space 
program.”    Aviation,  Space,  and  Environ  Med,  2000;  71:1120-
1125. 

22)  Pearce EN, Gerber AR, Gootnick DB, et al.  “Effects of chronic 
iodine  excess  in  a  cohort  of  long-term  American  workers  in 
West Africa.”  J Clin Endocr & Metab, 2002; 87:5499-5502. 
23)  Pittman,  et  al.    “Thyroidal  radioiodine  uptake.    NEJM,  1969; 

280:1431-1434. 

24)  Wartofsky L and Ingbar SH.  “Estimation of the rate of release 
of non-thyroxine iodine from the thyroid glands of normal sub-
jects  and  patients  with  thyrotoxicosis.”    J  Clin  Endocr,  1971; 
33:488-500. 

25)  London  WT,  Vought  RL,  and  Brown  FA.    “Bread  –  a  dietary 
source of large quantities of iodine.”  NEJM, 1965; 273:381. 
26)  Stanley MM.  “The direct estimation of the rate of thyroid hor-
mone formation in man. The effect of the iodide ion on thyroid 
iodine utilization.”  J Clin Endocr, 1949; 9:941-954. 

27)  Wolff  BJ  and  Chaikoff  IL.    “Plasma  inorganic  iodide  as  a  ho-
meostatic  regulator  of  thyroid  function.”    J  Biol  Chem,  1948; 
174:555-564. 

28)  Wolff J.  “Iodide goiter and the pharmacologic effects of excess 

(Continued on next page) 

34 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

 
 
 
 
 
iodide.”  Am J Med, 1969; 47:101-124. 

JAMA, 1976; 238:1124. 

29)  Wartofsky L, Ransil BJ, and Ingbar SH.  “Inhibition by iodine of 
the release of thyroxine from the thyroid glands of patients with 
thyrotoxicosis.”  J Clin Invest, 1970; 49:78-86. 

30)  Abraha m  GE,  Flech as 

JC.  
“Orthoiodosupplementation:    Iodine  sufficiency  of  the  whole 
human body.”  The Original Internist, 2002; 9:30-41. 

and   Hakala 

JD, 

31)  Pennington  JA  and  Schoen  SA.    “Total  diet  study:    Estimated 
dietary  intakes  of  nutritional  elements,  1982-1991.”    Internat  J 
Vit Nutr, 1996; 66:350-362. 

32)  Vobecky  M  and  Babicky  A.    “Effect  of  enhanced  bromide  in-
take  on  the  concentration  ratio  I/Br  in  the  rat  thyroid  gland.”  
Bio Trace Element Research, 1994; 43:509-513. 

33)  Velicky  J,  Titlbach  M,  Duskova  J,  et  al.    “Potassium  bromide 
and  the  thyroid  gland  of  the  rat:  morphology and immunohisto-
chemistry,  RIA  and INNA analysis.”  Ann  Anat, 1997; 179:421-
431. 

34)  Van Leeuwen FXR, Hanemaauer R, and Loeber JG.  “The effect 
of  sodium  bromide  on  thyroid  function.”    Arch  Toxicol  Suppl, 
1988; 12:93-97. 

35)  Abraham  GE.    “Iodine  supplementation  markedly  increases 
urinary  excretion  of  fluoride  and  bromide.”    Townsend  Letter, 
2003; 238:108-109. 

36)  Shimomura  K,  Mullinix  MG,  Kakunaga  T,  et  al.    “Bromine 
residue  at  hydrophilic  region  influences  biological  activity  of 
aplysiatoxin,  a  tumor  promoter.”    Science,  1983;  222:1242-
1244. 

37)  Sangster  B,  Blom  JL,  Sekhuis  VM,  et  al.    “The  influence  of 
sodium  bromide  in  man:    A  study  in  human  volunteers  with 
special  emphasis  on  the  endocrine  and the  central  nervous  sys-
tem.”   Fd Chem Toxic, 1983; 21:409-419. 

38)  Torii  S,  Mitsumori  K,  Inubushi  S,  et  al.    “The  REM  sleep-
inducing  action  of  a  naturally  occurring  organic  bromine  com-
pound in the encephalc isole cat.”  Psychopharmacologia (Berl), 
1973; 29:65-75. 

39)  Dictionary of Scientific Biography.  Gillispie CC, editor.  Simon 

& Schuster, NY, 1970. 

40)  Coindet  JF.    “Decouverte  d’un  nouveau  remede  contre  le  goi-

tre.”  Ann Clin Phys, 1820; 15:49.  

41)  Coindet JF.  “Nouvelles recherches sur les effets de l’iode, et sur 
les precautions a suivre dans le traitement de goitre par le nou-
veau  remede.”    Bibl  Univ  Sci  Belle-Lettres  Arts,  1821;  16:140, 
1821. 

42)  Lugol JGA.  Memoire sur l’emploi de l’iode dans les maladies 

scrophuleuses.  Paris, 1829.  (Published by himself). 

43)  Boussingault JB.  “Recherches sur la cause qui produit le goitre 
dans les Cordilieres de la Nouvelle-Grenade.”  Ann Chim Phys, 
1831; 48:41. 

44)  Hartsock CL.  “Iodized salt in the prevention of goiter.”  JAMA, 

1926; 86:1334-1338. 

45)  Thompson WO, Brailey  AG, Thompson PK, et al.  “The range 
of effective iodine dosage in exophthalmic goiter III.”  Arch Int 
Med, 1930; 45:430. 

46)  Gennaro  AR.    Remington:    The  Science  and  Practice  of  Phar-

macy.  19th edition.  Mack Publishing Co., 1995; 1267. 

47)  Cohn BNE.  “Absorption of compound solution of iodine from 
the gastro-intestinal tract.”  Arch Intern Med, 1932; 49:950-956. 

48)  Diagnosis  and  Treatment  of  Diseases  of  the  Thyroid  Gland.  

Rowland AF, editor.  WB Saunders Company, 1932; 98. 

49)  Beebe  SP.    “Iodine  in  the  treatment  of  goiter.”    M  Rec,  1921; 

99:996-999. 

50)  Brent GA and Larsen PR.  “Treatment of hypothyroidism.”  In:  
Werner & Ingbar’s The Thyroid.  Braverman LE and Utiger RD,  
editors.  Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000; 853-858. 

51)  Ghandrakant  C,  Kapdim  MD,  and  Wolfe  JN.    “Breast  cancer  
thyroid  supplements  for  hypothyroidism.”  

relationship 

to 

52)  Braverman LE and Utiger RD.  “Introduction to thyrotoxicosis.”   

In:   Werner  &  Ingbar’s  The  Thyroid.  Braverman LE and Utiger 
RD, editors.  Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000; 515-517. 
53)  Von Basedow GA.  “Exophthalmos durch Hyperrophie des Zell-
gewebca in der Augenhoehle.”  Wsrchr Ges Heilk, 1840; 6:197. 
54)  Stokes W.  Diseases of the Heart and Aorta.   odges and Smith, 

Dublin, 1854; 278. 

55)  Trousseau  A.    Lectures  on  Clinical  Medicine.    Vol.  1,  Lecture 
XIX,  “Exophthalmic  goitre  of  Graves’  disease.”    New  Syden-
ham Society, London, 1868; 586. 

56)  Trousseau  A.    Lectures  on  Clinical  Medicine.    Vol.  1,  Lecture 
XIX,  “Exophthalmic  goitre  of  Graves’  disease.”    New  Syden-
ham Society, London, 1868; 587. 

57)  Thompson WO, Thompson PK, Brailey AG, et al.  “Prolonged 
treatment  of  exophthalmic  goiter  by  iodine  alone.”    Arch  Int 
Med, 1930; 45:481-502. 

58)  Kocher  T.    “Discussion  on  the  surgical  treatment  of  Graves’ 

disease.”  BMJ, 1910; ii:931-939. 

59)  Kocher  T.    “Ueber  Jodbasedow.”    Arch  L  Klin  Chir,  1910; 

92:1166. 

60)  Cowell SJ and Mellanby E.  “The effect of iodine on hyperthy-

roidism in man.”  Quart J Med, 1924-1925; 18:1-18. 

61)  DeCourcy  JL.   “The use of  Lugol’s  solution in exophthalmic  goi-

tre.”  Ann Surg, 1927; 86:871-876. 

62)  Plummer HS and Boothby WM.  “The value of iodine in exoph-

thalmic goiter.”  J Iowa Med Soc, 1924; 14:65. 

63)  Plummer WA.  “Iodin in the treatment of goiter.”  Med Cl North 

America, 1925; 8:1145-1151. 

64)  Lahey FH.  “The use of iodine in goitre.”  Boston Med & Surg J, 

1925; 193:487-490. 

65)  Starr P,  Walcott  HP,  Segall  HN,  et  al.    “The  effect  of  iodin  in 

exophthalmic goiter.”  Arch Int Med, 1924; 34:355-364. 
66)  Fraser FR.  “Iodine in exophthalmic goitre.”  BMJ, 1925; 1:1. 
67)  Astwood  EB.    “Treatment  of  hyperthyroidism  with  thiourea  and 

thiouracil.”  JAMA, 1943; 122:78-81. 

68)  Astwood  EB  and  VanderLaan  WP.    “Thiouracil  derivatives  of 
greater  activity  for  the  treatment  of  hyperthyroidism.”    J  Clin 
Endocr, 1945; 5:424-430. 

69)  Godley  AF  and  Stanbury  JB.    “Preliminary  experience  in  the 
treatment of hyperthyroidism with potassium perchlorate.  J Clin 
Endocr & Metab, 1954; 14:70-78. 

70)  Wolff J.  “Perchlorate and the thyroid gland.”  Pharmacological 

Reviews, 1998; 50:89-105.    

71)  Solomon  DH,  Beck  JC,  VanderLaan  WP,  and  Astwood  EB.  
“Prognosis  of  hyperthyroidism  treated  by  antithyroid  drugs.”  
JAMA, 1953; 152:201-205. 

72)  Hershman  JM,  Givens  JR,  Cassidy  CE,  and  Astwood  EB.  
“Long-term outcome of hyperthyroidism treated with antithyroid 
drugs.”  J Clin Endocr & Metab, 1966; 26:803-807. 

73)  Wartofsky  L.    “Low  remission  after  therapy  for  Graves’  dis-

ease.”  JAMA, 1973; 226:1083-1088. 

74)  Reynolds LR and Kotchen TA.  “Antithyroid drugs and radioac-

tive iodine.”  Arch Int Med, 1979; 139:651-653. 

75)  Solomon B, Glinoer D, Lagasse R, et al.  “Current trends in the 
management  of  Graves’  disease.”    J  Clin  Endocr  &  Metab, 
1990; 70:1518-1524. 

76)  Cooper  DS.    “Treatment  of  Thyrotoxicosis.”    In:    Werner  & 
Ingbar’s  The  Thyroid.    Braverman  LE  and  Utiger  RD,  editors.  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000; 691-715. 

77)  Markou  K,  Georgopoulos  N,  Kyriazopoulou V,  et al.    “Iodine-

induced hypothyroidism.”  Thyroid, 2001; 11:501-510. 

78)  Leger AF, Massin JP, Laurent MF, et al,  “Iodine-induced thyro-
toxicosis: analysis of eighty-five consecutive cases.”  Euro J of 

(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004 

35 

Clin Invest, 1984; 14:449-455. 

79)  Fradkin  JE  and  Wolff  J.    “Iodide-induced  thyrotoxicosis.”  

Medicine, 1983; 62:1-20. 

80)  Gaitan E, Nelson NC, and Poole GV.  “Endemic goiter and en-
demic thyroid disorders.”  World J Surg, 1991; 15:205-215. 
81)  Weaver DK, Batsakis JG, and Nishiyama RH.  “Relationship of 
iodine to ‘lymphocytic goiters.’”  Arch Surg, 1968; 98:183-186. 
82)  Weaver DK, Nishiyama RH, Burton WD, et al.  “Surgical thy-

roid disease.”  Arch Surg, 1966; 92:796-801. 

83)  Furszyfer  J,  Kurland  LT,  Woolner  LB,  et  al.    “Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis in Olmsted County, Minnesota, 1935 through 1967.”   
Mayo Clin Proc, 1970; 45:586-596. 

84)  Hashimoto H.  “Zur Kenntniss der lymphomatosen Veranderung 
der  Schilddruse  (Struma  lymphomatosa).”    Arch  Klin  Chir, 
1912; 97:219-248. 

85)  Weetman AP.  “Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis.”  In:  Werner 
& Ingbar’s The Thyroid.  Braverman LE and Utiger RD, editors.  
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000; 721-732. 

86)  Follis RH.  “Further observations on thyroiditis and colloid ac-
cumulation in hyperplastic thyroid glands of hamsters receiving 
excess iodine.”  Lab Invest, 1964; 13:1590-1599. 

87)  Belshaw  BE  and  Becker  DV.    “Necrosis  of  follicular  cells  and 
discharge  of  thyroidal  iodine  induced by  administering iodine to 
iodine-deficient dogs.”  J Clin Endocr & Metab, 1973; 13:466-474. 
88)  Mahmoud  I,  Colin  I,  Many  MC,  et  al.    “Direct  toxic  effect  of 
iodine  in  excess  on  iodine-deficient  thyroid  gland:  epithelial 
necrosis and inflammation associated with lipofuscin accumula-
tion.”  Exp Mol Pathol, 1986; 44:259-271. 

89)  Bagchi N, Brown TR, and Sundick RS.  “Thyroid cell injury is 
an initial event in the induction of autoimmune thyroiditis by iodine 
in obese strain chickens.”  Endocrinology, 1995; 136:5054-5060. 
90)  Many MC, Papadopoulaous J, Martic C, et al.  “Iodine-induced 
cell damage in mouse hyperplastic thyroid is associated to lipid 
peroxidation.” In: Progress in Thyroid Research. Proceedings of 
the 10th International Thyroid Conference.  Gordon A, Gross J, 
and Hennenian G, editors.  Balkema, Rotterdam, 1991; 635-638. 
91)  Ohayon R, Boeynaems JM, Braekman JC, et al.  “Inhibition of 
thyroid  NADPH-oxidase  by  2-iodohexadecanal  in  a  cell-free 
system.”  Molecular and Cellular Endocr, 1994; 99:133-141. 
92)  Krawiec  L,  Chazenbalk  GD,  Puntarulo  SA,  et al.   “The  inhibi-
tion  of  PB125I  formation  of  calf  thyroid  caused  by  14-iodo1-5-
hydroxy-eicosatrienoic acid is due to decreased H2O2 availabil-
ity.”  Horm Metabol Res, 1988; 20:86-90. 

93)  Pisarev  MA,  Chazenbalk  GD,  Valsecchi  RM,  et  al.    “Thyroid 
autoregulation.  Inhibition  of  goiter  growth  and  of  cyclic  AMP 
formation in rat thyroid by iodinated derivatives of arachidonic 
acid.”  J Endocr Invest, 1988; 11:669-674. 

94)  Krawiec  L,  Chester  HA,  Bocanera  LV,  et  al.    “Thyroid  auto-
regulation:    Evidence  for  an  action  of  iodoarachidonates  and 
iodide  at  the  cell  membrane  level.”    Horm  Metab  Res,  1991; 
23:321-325. 

95)  Pisarev MA, Bocanera LV, Chestor HA, et al.  “Effect of iodo-
arachidonates on thyroid FRTL-5 cells growth.”  Horm Metabol 
Res, 1992; 24:558-561. 

96)  Rabinovitz  JL,  Zanger  M,  and  Podoliski  V.    “Identification  by 
nuclear  magnetic  resonance  of  iodinated  lipids  in  the  dog  thy-
roid.”  Biochem and Biophys Res Com, 1976; 68:1161-1168. 
97)  Dugrillon  A,  Uedelhoven  WM,  Pisarev  MA,  et  al.  
“Identification  of  6-iodolactone  in  iodide-treated  human  goiter 
and its inhibitory effect on proliferation of human thyroid folli-
cles.”  Horm Metab Res, 1994; 26:465-469. 

98)  Abraham  GE.    “The  calcium  controversy.”    J  of  Appl  Nutr, 

1982; 34:69-73. 

99)  Abraham  GE.    “Nutritional  factors  in  the  etiology  of  the  pre-
menstrual tension wyndromes.”  J Rep Med, 1983; 28:446-464. 
100) Abraham GE and Rumley RE.  “The role of nutrition in manag-

ing  the  premenstrual  tension  syndromes.”    J  Rep  Med,  1987; 
32:405-422. 

101) Abraham  GE  and Grewal H.  “A total dietary program  empha-
sizing  magnesium  instead  of  calcium:    Effect  on  the  mineral 
density  of  calcaneous  bone  in  postmenopausal  women  on  hor-
monal therapy.”  J Rep Med, 1990; 35:503-507. 

102) Abraham  GE.    “The  importance  of  magnesium  in  the  manage-
ment  of  primary  postmenopausal  osteoporosis.”    J  Nut  Med, 
1991; 2:165-178. 

103) Abraham  GE  and  Flechas  JD.    “Management  of  fibromyalgia:  
Rationale  for  the  use  of  magnesium  and  malic  acid.”    J  Nutr 
Med, 1992; 3:49-59. 

104) Wartofsky  L.    “Has  the  use  of  antithyroid  drugs  for  Graves’ 

disease become obsolete?”  Thyroid, 1993; 3:335-344. 

105) Williams KV, Nayak S, Becker D, et al.  “Fifty years of experi-
ence  with  propylthiouracil-associated hepatotoxicity:    What have 
we learned?”  J Clin Endocr & Metab, 1997; 82:1727-1733. 

106) Schultz J and Kaminker K.  “Myeloperoxidase of the leucocyte 
of  normal  human  blood.”    Arch  Biochem  &  Biophys,  1962; 
96:465-467. 

107) Morrison  M  and  Schonbaum  GR.    “Peroxidase-catalyzed  halo-

genation.”  Ann Rev Biochem, 1976; 45:861-888. 

108) Thomas  JA  and  Hager  LP.    “Molecular  iodine  as  an  obligate 
intermediate in the iodination of tyrosine by chloroperoxidase.”  
Biochem & Biophyscial Research Comm, 1969; 35:444-450. 
109) Baron  DN  and  Ahmed  SA.    “Intracellular  concentrations  of 
water and of the principal electrolytes determined by analysis of 
isolated human leukocytes.”  Clin Sci, 1969; 37:205-219. 

110) Stole V.   “Stimulation of  iodoproteins  and  thyroxine  formation 
in  human  leukocytes  by  phagocytosis.”    Biochem  Biophys  Res 
Commun, 1971; 45:159-168. 

111) Klebanoff SJ and Green WL.  “Degradation of thyroid hormones 
by  phagocytosing  human  leukocytes.”    J  Clin  Invest,  1973; 
52:60-72. 

112) Fisher  DA,  Oddie  TH,  and  Epperson  D.    “Effect  of  increased 
dietary iodide on thyroid accumulation and secretion in euthyroid 
arkansas subjects.”  J Clin Endocr, 1965; 25:1580-1590.   

113)  Koutras  DA,  Alexander  WD,  Harden  RM,  et  al.    “Effect  of 
small  iodine  supplements  on  thyroid  function  in  normal  indi-
viduals.”  J Clin Endocr, 1964; 24:857-862.   

114) Wartofsky L and Burman KD.  “Alterations in thyroid function 
in  patients  with  systemic  illness:    The  ‘euthyroid  sick  syn-
drome.’”  Endocrine Reviews, 1982; 3:164-217. 

115) Gregerman RI and Solomon N.  “Acceleration of thyroxine and 
triiodothyronine  turnover  during  bacterial  pulmonary  infections 
and  fever:  implications  for  the  functional  state  of  the  thyroid 
during  stress  and  senescence.”    J  Clin  Endocr  &  Metab,  1967; 
27:93. 

116) Woeber KA.  “Alterations in thyroid hormone economy during 
acute infection with Diplococcus pneumoniae in the rhesus mon-
key.”  J Clin Invest, 1971; 50:378. 

117) DeRubertis FR and Woeber KA.  “Evidence for enhanced cellu-
lar  uptake  and  binding  of  thyroxine  in  vivo  during  acute  infec-
tion  with  Diplococcus  pneumoniae.”    J  Clin  Invest,  1972;  
51:788. 

118) Abraham  GE,  et  al.    “Measurement of  urinary  iodide  levels  by 
ion-selective electrode:  Improved sensitivity and specificity by 
chromatography  on  anion-exchange  resin.”    Optimox  Research 
Info #IOD-03. (Reprint available upon request). 

119) Abraham GE, Flechas JD, and Hakala JC.  “Optimum levels of 
iodine  for  greatest  mental  and  physical  health.”    The  Original 
Internist, 2002; 9:5-20. 

120) Abraham  GE.    “Iodine  supplementation  markedly  increases 
urinary  excretion  of  fluoride  and  bromide.”    Townsend  Letter, 
2003; 238:108-109. 

121) Giani C, Fierabracci P, Bonacci R, et al.  “Relationship between 

36 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     March   2004