      Orthoiodosupplementation: Iodine sufficiency of the whole human body

                Guy. E. Abraham M.D.1, Jorge D. Flechas M.D.2 and John C. Hakala R.Ph.3


I.    Introduction

The essential trace element iodine (I) is the only one required for and in the synthesis of hormones. These I-
containing hormones are involved in embryogenesis, differentiation, cognitive development, growth,
metabolism, and maintenance of body temperature. I is highly concentrated in one organ, the thyroid gland,
which becomes visibly enlarged when there is a deficiency of that element. It is the most deficient trace
element in the world with an acknowledged third of mankind functioning below optimal level due to its
deficiency (1). Low intake of I is the world’s leading cause of intellectual deficiency (2). Yet, as unbelievable as
it may sound, this essential element has suffered from total neglect regarding the amount of it required by the
human body for optimal health. In 1930, Thompson et al wrote (3): “The normal daily requirement of the body
for iodine has never been determined.” This statement is still true today, more than 70 years later.

At the Children’s Summit held in 1990, the United Nations and heads of state assembled for that occasion,
pledged to eliminate I deficiency by the year 2000. Commenting on this meeting, John T. Dunn stated in 1993
(4)
    “The goal is technically feasible, but many obstacles must be overcome before it is realized.” In the list of
obstacles, no mention was made of the greatest obstacle of them all: Our total ignorance regarding sufficiency
of the whole human body for I. It is obvious that I deficiency has been equated with the simple goiter,
cretinism, and I-deficiency disorders related to its role in thyroidal physiology. Supplementation was
considered adequate if such amount prevented cretinism, simple goiter and symptoms of hypothyroidism (1,2,4).
The assumption that the only role of I as an essential element is in its essentiality for the synthesis of T3 and T4,
became a dogma. With the advent of sensitive assays, Thyroid Stimulating Hormones (TSH) was promoted to
queen of tests for thyroid functions (5) and I was forgotten altogether as irrelevant to the point where most
endocrinologists and other medical practitioners do not request a single test for urine I concentration, during
their whole medical career.

II.   Iodophobia and misinformation about I

It is ubiquitous: the fear of using or recommending I (Iodophobia) and misinformation about I are found in
books written by laypersons; in books written by physicians for laypersons; and in articles and books written by
physicians for physicians. We will use as examples one book written by a famous endocrinologist for
laypersons and a textbook of endocrinology written by physicians for physicians, both books recently published.

First, we will quote excerpts from a book published in 1999 and written by Doctor R. Arem M.D. for
consumers, with the title: “The thyroid solution: A revolutionary Mind-Body Program that will help you”. As
editor of an educational periodical on thyroid disorders, which is read by 25,000 physicians nationwide, Dr.
Arem’s views influence a large segment of practicing endocrinologists. Anyone awake will realize that eastern
mysticism and New Age occultism have penetrated deeply, although insidiously, into the practice of medicine.
On pages 309, 310 of his book, Dr. Arem recommends guided imagery, meditation, yoga and tai chi, without a
single reference to validate the effectiveness and lack of adverse effects of those practices. “I encourage men
and women to perform tai chi, yoga…”. In a section with the title “Iodine: A Double Edge Sword”, the author
stated on page 305: “Research has clearly established that the high dietary iodine content in some areas of the
world has resulted in a rise in the prevalence of thyroiditis and thyroid cancer.” One reference is given (7), and
when that reference is reviewed, there is no high dietary I intake involved. Essentially, that study evaluated the
incidence of thyroiditis and thyroid cancer in areas of Argentina with severe I deficiency, before and after
iodization of salt was made available. Urine I was 9.3 ± 1.7 ug/gm creatinine before iodization and 110 ± 82
ug/gm creatinine after iodization. Keep in mind that the RDA for I is 150 ug/day. The incidence of the more
invasive form of thyroid cancer did not change, but the incidence of papillary carcinoma was: 0.78/100,000/year
before and 0.84/100,000/year after iodization of salt. Obviously, the data available in this publication do not
agree with Doctor Arem’s conclusion about the association between high dietary I intake and thyroid cancer. In
fact, the available information on this subject, to be discussed later, points to chronic I deficiency as a
predisposing factor for thyroid cancer.

The iodophobic misinformation continues with anecdotal stories from Doctor Arem’s archives: A female
patient ingested 2-3 gm of kelp daily and developed Grave’s disease which necessitated “destruction of the
thyroid gland”. How strange! The mainland Japanese consumed a daily average of 4.6 gm of seaweed and they
are one of the healthiest people on earth (10,11,12,22,23). Another iodophobic story follows: NASA consulted
Doctor Arem because their ground personnel became “low grade” hypothyroid, whatever that means. Sherlock
Arem discovered the cause. The ground personnel were drinking water with 4 gm iodine per liter. That is
interesting because the maximum amount of iodine that can be dissolved in water at room temperature is 3 gm
per liter. Doctor Arem saved the day at NASA: “Alarmed by my warnings about the potential
consequences…”. What is the expert’s advice?
“I advise not consuming more than 500 to 600 micrograms a day”. With such iodophobia and misinformation
coming from the top, no wonder there is a trend of decreasing I consumption nationwide in the USA.

As we will now demonstrate, this kind of misinformation may have serious consequences. On page 232, Doctor
Arem wrote regarding the evaluation of simple goiter: “To determine the cause of your goiter, your physician
may order one or several of the following tests”. In that list, no mention was made of urine I levels, when in
fact, the most common cause of simple goiter worldwide is I deficiency. However, he may have given the
reason for not considering urine I levels in the evaluation of simple goiter, toward the end of the book on page
305: “To function normally, the thyroid requires 150 micrograms a day… In the United States, iodine
consumption ranges between 300 and 700 micrograms a day.” This statement has no reference and is
inaccurate. The last comprehensive nutritional survey (2) (NHANES III 1988-1994) revealed that the median
urine I concentration was 145 ug/L and 15% of the U.S. adult female population suffered from I deficiency
(urine I less than 50 ug/L). That is 1 out of every 7 female patients walking in a doctor’s office, interestingly,
the same risk ratio for breast cancer in our population, that is 1 in 8 (63). With this high prevalence of I
deficiency, including urine I levels in the initial screening of simple goiter is justified. Without the information
on urine I levels, the physician will most likely prescribe thyroid hormones to the I-deficient patient.

Hintze et al (8) compared the response of patients with simple goiter to administration of I at
400 ug/day and to the administration of T4 at 150 ug/day for a period of 8 months and 4 months after cessation
of therapy. The results definitely favor I over T4. There was a similar suppression of the size of the thyroid
gland with I, and with T4. This suppression persisted 4 months after discontinuation of I; whereas the mean
thyroid volume in the group receiving T4, returned to pre-T4 level 4 months after stopping T4 administration.
The authors concluded: “Our data clearly shows that iodine alone…is at least equally as effective for goiter
reduction as levothyroxine alone and offers the further benefit of a sustained effect after cessation of therapy”.

Of greater concern, however, is the possibility that I-deficient women are more prone to breast cancer and
depriving them of I is not in their best interest. Based on an extensive review of breast cancer epidemiological
studies, R.A. Wiseman (9) came to the following conclusions: 92-96% of breast cancer cases are sporadic; There
is a single cause for the majority of cases; The causative agent is deficiency of a micronutrient that is depleted
by a high fat diet; If such an agent is detected, intervention studies with supplementation should lead to a
decline in the incidence of breast cancer. It is the opinion of several investigators that this protective
micronutrient is the essential element I (14,16,19,20,54). Demographic surveys of Japan and Iceland revealed that
both countries have a relatively high intake of I, and low incidences of simple endemic goiter and breast cancer,
whereas in Mexico and Thailand, just the reverse is observed: a high incidence of both endemic goiter and
breast cancer (10). Thomas et al (11,12) has demonstrated a significant and inverse correlation between I intake and
the incidence of breast, endometrial and ovarian cancer in various geographical areas. Thyroid volume
measured by ultrasonometry and expressed as ml is significantly larger in Irish women with breast cancer than
controls with mean values of 12.9 ± 1.2 in controls and 20.4 ± 1.0 in women with breast cancer (13).
Intervention studies in female rats by Eskin (14-16) are very suggestive of a facilitating role of I deficiency on the
carcinogenic effect of estrogens, and a protective role of I by maintaining normality of breast tissues.

The administration of thyroid hormones to I-deficient women may increase further their risk for breast cancer.
In a group of women undergoing mammography for screening purposes (17) the incidence of breast cancer was
twice as high in women receiving thyroid medications for hypothyroidism (most likely induced by I deficiency)
than women not on thyroid supplement. The mean incidences were 6.2% in controls and 12.1% in women on
thyroid hormones. The incidence of breast cancer was twice as high in women on thyroid hormones for more
than 15 years (19.5%) compared to those on thyroid hormones for 5 years (10%).

Backwinkel and Jackson (18) have presented as evidence against the association between I deficiency and breast
cancer, the fact that in the state of Michigan, between 1924 and 1951, the prevalence of goiter decreased
markedly from 38.6% to 1.4%, but no detectable change was observed in the prevalence of breast cancer,
during that same interval of time. These authors are making the assumption that the amount of I required to
control goiter is the same as that required for protection against breast cancer. Ghent et al (19) and Eskin (20) have
estimated, based on their studies, that in both women and female rats, the amount of I required for protection
against breast cancer and fibrocystic disease of the breast (FDB), is at least 20 to 40 times the amount required
for control of goiter.

Medical textbooks written for physicians contain the same iodophobia and misinformation about I.
When I is incorporated into a drug, that drug gets all the credit for the good effects and I is blamed for the side
effects. Although there are several I-containing drugs used by physicians for various medical condition (21), we
will just cover one of these drugs, from information supplied by Roti and Vagenakis in the latest review on I
excess (21). Amiodarone is a benzofuranic derivative containing 75 mg I per 200 mg tablet. It is widely used for
the long term treatment of cardiac arrhythmia. It is long acting with 100 days half-life and releases 9 mg I daily
in patients ingesting the recommended amount. In the United States, Amiodarone induces hypothyroidism in
20% of patients ingesting it. The authors of that review blamed I for the hypothyroidism although no study has
been performed with daily administration of 9 mg of inorganic I in a similar group of patients. It would not be
surprising if inorganic I alone in equivalent amount resulted in the same beneficial effects without the side
effects, amount them, destructive thyroiditis which require large doses of glucocorticoids and in some cases,
thyroidectomy. Actually, there is a large population consuming close to 100 times the RDA almost daily, the
Japanese living in Japan. According to the Japanese Ministry of Health, the average daily consumption of
seaweed by mainland Japanese is 4.6 gm(22). At an average of 0.3% I in seaweed (range 0.08-0.45%) (22), that
would compute to an average daily intake of 13.8 mg I. Overall, the Japanese living in Japan are among the
healthiest people in the world, based on cancer statistics (23). They have one of the lowest incidence of I-
deficiency goiter and hypothyroidism (10).

In the same review on I excess (21), published in a textbook read by most endocrinologists, and therefore
influencing the national trend in the management of thyroid disorders, there is a subsection with the title “Iodine
as a Pathogen”. This is an essential trace element that is given the attribute of a Pathogen. Commenting on the
latest nutritional survey (NHANES III), the authors stated that this trend of decreasing I intake has resulted in a
lower percentage of the U.S. population consuming excess I, defining excess I intake as urine I levels above 500
ug/L (0.5 mg/L): “This trend in iodine consumption has also resulted in a decline in the percentage of the
population with excessive iodine intake (>500 ug/L) from 27.8% in the 1971 to 1974 survey to 5.3% in the
1988 to 1994 survey”. With this iodophobic mentality, a cut off point of 0.5 mg I/L of urine has been arbitrarily
chosen for excess I intake. What is considered excess I by these authors represents 3% of the average daily I
intake by mainland Japanese, a population with a very low incidence of cancer of the female reproduction
organs (11,12). This attitude toward I may play an important role in the high incidence of cancer of the female
reproductive organs in our population. It would be of interest to compare the prevalence of breast cancer with
urine I levels from data available in the last two National Nutritional Surveys.

Currently, the average daily intake of I by the U.S. population is 100 times less than the amount consumed by
the mainland Japanese. In the 1960’s, I-containing dough conditioners increase the average daily I intake more
than 4 times the RDA (24). One slice of bread contained the full RDA of
150 ug. The risk for breast cancer in our population was then 1 in 20 (63). Over the last 2 decades, food
processors started using bromine, a goitrogen (25) instead of I in the bread making process. The risk for breast
cancer now is 1 in 8, and it is increasing at 1% per year (63). The rationale for replacing I with a goitrogen in a
population already I deficient, is not clear, but definitely not logical and against common sense. In rats on a diet
with the rat RDA for I (3 ug), adding thiocyanate, a goitrogen, at 25 mg/day caused hypothyroidism (26).
Increasing I intake to 80 times rat RDA prevented this effect. In humans, that would be the equivalent of 12 mg
I/day. It is likely that a large percentage of patients receiving T4 for hypothyroidism are I deficient. This I
deficiency is worsened by the goitrogens they are exposed to. Prescribing T4 to them increases further their risk
for breast cancer (17). What these patients really need is a supply of I large enough for I sufficiency and to
neutralize the effect of most of these goitrogens. Based on the studies of Lakshmy et al (26) in rats, that amount
of I would correspond to the level of I consumed by mainland Japanese.

For those who trust the food processors to meet their nutritional needs, the last significant source of I is table
salt, which contains 74 ug I per gm of NaCl. An editorial in the February 2002 issue of the Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and metabolism (27) exhorted the USA and Canada to decrease the amount of I in table salt by
one half. “Most other countries use 20-40 PPM as iodine, and the United States and Canada should consider
lowering the level of fortification to this range.” This recommended low level of I fortification between 20-40
PPM had no significant effect on urine I levels and size of goiters in published studies from Germany and
Hungary (28,29). Essentially, this amount of I was designed to give a false sense of I sufficiency but to really be
ineffective. It is ironic that the title of this editorial is: “Guarding our Nation’s Thyroid Health”. With
guardians like that, who needs enemies?

Considering that low I intake is associated with intellectual deficiency, if we continue to lower the supply of I
from our food sources, if we continue to disseminate misinformation about I and if we promote iodophobia in
Christian America, we will end up with a nation of zombies worshiping Satan as Queen of Heaven.

III. Requirement of the thyroid gland for I

After reviewing the available information in published studies designed to assess the effect of various amounts
of I on thyroid physiology, it was possible to arrive at a tentative range of intake that would result in sufficiency
of the thyroid gland for that element.

With the availability of radioactive isotopes of I and improved understanding of I metabolism, it became
obvious that the thyroid gland concentrates this trace element more than 2 orders of magnitude, compared to
most other organs and tissues. The percent of radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland correlated inversely with
the amount of I ingested (30). In areas of severe endemic goiter, it was above 80% (31). The % uptake decreases
progressively with increased intake of I, and at RDA levels (150 ug), the % uptake was maintained between 20
and 30% (24). In the 1960’s I added to bread increased the average daily intake 4-5 times RDA levels, with a
concomitant decrease in % uptake below 20% (24,32). During the “Cold War” years, the threat of nuclear attack
and radioactive fallout became a topic of national interest (33). Attempts were made to estimate the amount of I
required to suppress maximally radioiodide uptake by the thyroid (34,37). It is of interest to note that these studies
were not performed to assess requirement of the human body for I, but as a crisis management in case of fallout
of radioisotopes of I during a nuclear attack or accident. However, we will use these data to assist us in
pinpointing the optimal requirement of the human body for I.
                                                        Table I

                            Percent uptake of radioiodide by the thyroid gland and amount of
                              iodide retained by the thyroid gland in response to increasing
                                   intake of stable iodide (all values below are means)

                                          Thyroidal      Amount of
                              Intake     Radioiodide   iodide retained              References
                             mg I/day      Uptake       by the thyroid
                                          (percent)    gland (ug/day)

                               0.02          84.7                                 Karmarkar et al
                                                                          Am. J. Clin. Nut 27:96-103, 1974
                               0.03          68.7                                         "
                               0.76          42.4                                         "


                               0.11          28.6           31.8                      Pittman et al
                                                                         N. Engl. J. Med 280:1431-1434, 1969
                               0.68          15.4           105                            "


                                3.0          5.0             150                    Saxena et al
                                                                             Science 138:430-431, 1962


                               10.0          4.0            400                      Sternthal et al
                                                                         N. Engl. J. Med 303:1083-1088, 1980
                                15           1.9            285                            "
                                30           1.6            480                           "
                                50           1.2            600                           "
                               100           0.6            600                           "


                                14           3.5            490            Hamilton, J.G. and Soley, M.H.
                                                                          Am. J. Physical 131:135-143, 1940




The ranges of % radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland from some selected publications are displayed in Table
I. The goal of this selection was to cover a wide range of I intake, from severe goiter to intake of excess I.
From the publications by Karmarker et al (31) 3 areas were selected, representing severe, (<25 ug I/day)
moderate (25-50 ug/day) and mild (51-100 ug/day) I deficiency. Moving up into the RDA range, the 2 studies
of Pittman et al, in 2 groups of normal subjects before and after I was added to bread at a level of 150 ug I/slice
of bread (24). The mean I intake in the 2 groups were 2/3 and 4-5 times RDA levels. Going up in the scale of I
intake, Saxena et al (34) were the first to attempt a systematic study of the effect of increasing I intake on the %
uptake of radioiodide by the thyroid gland in order to find the minimum oral dose of I for maximum
suppression of radioactive I uptake by the thyroid gland. These researchers used 63 euthyroid children as
subjects and they express the amount of I ingested as mg I/m2/day. The range of I intake covered was from 0.1
to 2.5 mg/m2/day, which would correspond to a range of 0.2 to 5 mg I in the adult. At 0.1 mg, the percent
uptake varied from 20 to 30%. On a semilogarythmic graph, there was a linear relationship between the log of I
intake and % thyroid uptake of radioiodide. This linearity persisted up to 1.5 mg/m2/day where the % uptake
seems to reach a plateau at 5% uptake with oral doses of I up to 2.5 mg/m2/day. Because of the apparent
leveled off at 5% thyroidal uptake at 1.5 mg/m2/day (equivalent to 3 mg I in adults), Saxena et al concluded that
this percentage represented maximum suppression of radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland. Six years later,
Cuddihy (35) observed a 4% radioiodide uptake when 10 mg I was ingested. Hamilton and
Soley (36) in 1940, were able to achieve a mean % uptake of 3.5% when 14 mg I was mixed with the radioactive
tracer. In 1980, Sternthal et al (37) used amounts of I from 10 mg to 100 mg/day. At 10 mg, they confirm the
4% uptake observed by Cuddihy, and they were able to achieve near maximum suppression (0.6% radioiodide
uptake by the thyroid gland) with a daily I intake of 100 mg.

If these data are plotted on a semilogarithm graph, with % radioiodine uptake on the y-axis and the logarithm of
the amount of I ingested on the x-axis, 4 slopes and ranges are observed (Fig. 1). By extending the first 2 slopes
A and B to the point where their extensions cross the x-axis at zero % uptake, we can estimate the amount of I
required for sufficiency of these 2 “pools” of I. Slope A cross the x-axis at 0.27 mg and slope B, at 6 mg I. The
range of intake covering slope A could be called the RDA range, or the goiter control range, since no more
uptake of radioactive I was required at .27 mg which is the upper limit (0.3 mg) of the RDA for control of goiter
under all physiological conditions (1).

Slope A is very steep, and therefore represents a range of I intake where the I-trapping mechanism of the
thyroid gland is very inefficient. Within the linear portion of that range, that is, with intake of I less than 100
ug/day, extrathyroidal tissues would be able to compete effectively with the thyroid for available I. To be
discussed latter, the mammary glands possess an I-trapping system similar to that of the thyroid and have
certain requirements for I to maintain normality. The larger breast of women would retain more I than men, and
there would be less I available for the I-trapping of the thyroid gland. This would result in a greater incidence
and prevalence of thyroid dysfunction’s in women than in men, mainly in areas of marginal I intake. Indeed,
the prevalence of goiter in endemic areas is 6 times higher in pubertal girls than pubertal boys (38). Subclinical
and overt hypo- and hyperthyroidism are more common in women than in men (39,40). The physiological
approach in these cases would be to treat them with I supplementation in optimal amounts, not thyroid
hormones and anti thyroid drugs.

In the July 2002 issue of Bottom Line Health magazine, there is an article by Dr. R.L. Shames, M.D. entitled
“Thyroid Disease Could Be the Cause Of Your Symptoms”. This article is saturated with misinformation:
“The thyroid needs iodine to function, but deficiencies of this mineral are largely a thing of the past because of
our high consumption of iodized salt. Especially if you live near a coast, you may be getting too much iodine,
which is harmful to the thyroid”. Misinformation #1: I deficiency is a thing of the past. Fact #1: The last
National Nutritional Survey (NHANES III 1988-1994) revealed that 15% of the U.S. adult female population
suffered from I deficiency, defined as urine I level below 50 ug/L (2), which is a very low level by any standard.
Misinformation #2: “High consumption of iodized salt prevents I deficiency”. Fact #2: Iodized salt contains 74
ug I/gm salt. The purpose of iodization of salt was to prevent goiter and cretinism, not for optimal level of I
required by the human body. For example, to ingest the amount of I needed to control FDB, that is 5 mg I/day
(19)
     , you need to consume 68 gm of salt. To reach levels of I ingested by mainland Japanese, a population with a
very low prevalence of cancer of the female reproductive organs, you need 168 gm of salt. Misinformation #3:
You may be getting too much I if you live near a coast. Fact #3: Kung et al (Clin. Endo 53:725-731, 2000),
after investigating I deficiency in Hong Kong, concluded: “Our experience in Hong Kong has shown that it is
not safe to assume that iodine insufficiency does not exist in coastal regions”. Misinformation #4: Too much I
from coastal areas is harmful to the thyroid. Fact #4: From the study just mentioned, coastal areas do not even
supply enough I to prevent I deficiency. The article by Dr. Shames even has a subsection teaching his readers
how to reduce I intake! Considering that 15% of his female readers are already I deficient, even by the low
RDA standard, what a shame!

Returning now to Fig. 1, slope B corresponds to I sufficiency of the thyroid gland, and represents a range where
the efficiency of the I-trapping mechanism by the thyroid is markedly improved over slope A which is steeper,
and therefore less efficient. Slope B starts at 0.1 mg, the upper limit for mild deficiency and extends to 6 mg,
theoretically, the optimal I intake for sufficiency of the thyroid gland. Slope C is almost horizontal,
representing a range of I between 3 mg and 14 mg. The thyroid gland possesses maximal efficiency of the I-
trapping mechanism over the range of I intake in slope C. Slope D from 15 mg to 100 mg of iodide could be
called the saturation range. In order to refine further the optimal range of I intake, Fig. 2 displays the range of I
intake from 0.1 to 100 mg.
                                                                                                                 Percent                                                                              ug I/24 hr
                                                                                                                                                       30                                             600
                                     Percent                                                       Percent
                                    100                                                                    100




                                                                                                                 24hr Uptake of 131 I by the Thyroid




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Amount Retained by the Thyroid
  24hr 131I Uptake by the Thyroid




                                     80                                                                    80                                          20                                             400
                                                                                                                                                                 B

                                                 A
                                     60                                                                    60                                                                                     50%
                                                                                                                                                                                                  SAT




                                     40                                                                    40                                          10                                             200


                                     20                             B                                      20                                                                       C

                                                                                      C                                                                                                     D
                                                                                               D


                                          0.01       0.1
                                                           .27
                                                                    1.0
                                                                                      6
                                                                                          10         100                                                                           6            100
                                                                                                                                                            .1       1                 10
                                                             Daily intake of I (mg)                                                                                   Daily I intake (mg)
  Fig. 1 - Percent 24hr uptake of radioiodide by the thyroid gland with increasing intake of I.                       Fig. 2 - Percent 24hr uptake of radioiodide and computed uptake of I/24hr by
                                                                                                                               the thyroid gland, following intake of increasing amount of I.




The amount of I retained by the thyroid gland was also plotted for each intake levels. The amount retained was
computed by multiplying the amount of I ingested by the % uptake of radioiodine by the thyroid gland. The 6
mg point is of interest because not only it is the crossing point of slope B at zero radioiodide uptake on the x-
axis, but it represents also the 50% saturation point of the I trapping system of the thyroid gland. A system in a
state of dynamic equilibrium would be the most stable at midpoint between the 2 extremes, that is at 50%
saturation. The RDA for I corresponds to 5% saturation of the I-trapping mechanism of the thyroid gland, a
very unstable position, predisposing to both hypo- and hyperthyroidism. The intake of 14 mg was the
maximum amount that did not trigger the autoregulatory mechanism of the thyroid gland. This amount may
represent the upper limit of I required for sufficiency of the whole human body. At 15 mg intake, the thyroid
gland downregulates the efficiency of the I trapping in an attempt to bring down the amount of I retained to
50% saturation (Fig. 2). Above 15 mg intake, the efficiency of the trapping mechanism increases markedly
with greater intake of I to reach saturation at 50 mg intake and 0.6 mg/24 hr of trapped I by the thyroid gland
(Fig. 2).

Searching the literature, we found evidence supporting the amount observed in our calculation regarding the
saturation of the I trapping by the normal thyroid, that is 0.6 mg/day. For example, Wagner et al (41) observed in
an euthyroid subject who received increasing amount of iodide that the maximum trapping of I by the thyroid
was 50 ug/2 hrs. This value multiplied by 12 = 600 ug/24 hr. Fisher et al (42) observed in 20 normal subjects
receiving different amounts of I, that the computed I accumulation/day by the thyroid gland was highest in 2
subjects with values of 608 and 613 ug/24 hr.

Regarding the optimal I intake of 6 mg/day for sufficiency of the thyroid gland, there are some very interesting
observations reported by various investigators, with 6 mg mentioned in connection with various physiological
parameters of thyroid function. With optimal intake of I, thyroid functions would be the most stable under
adverse conditions, maintaining hormeostatis when pathological conditions tend to destabilize homeostatis in
both directions, toward hypo- and hyperactivity of the thyroid gland. Therefore, the optimal intake of I for
thyroid sufficiency should have the greatest effect in restoring normal functions under both conditions. The
amount 6 mg/day happens to be the daily intake of I that gave the maximum reduction in basal metabolism
toward the normal range in most cases of Grave’s disease (hyperthyroidism) (3).

First, let us describe the form of I used in these studies. The Lugol solution contains 5% iodine and 10%
potassium iodide (43). It has been available since 1829 when it was introduced by french physician Jean Lugol,
and was used extensively in medical practice during the early part of the 20th century. The recommended intake
for I supplementation at that time was 2 drops/day corresponding to 12.5 mg I. This recommendation was still
mentioned in the 19th Edition of Remington’s Science and Practice of Pharmacy, published in 1995 (43). As
quoted by Ghent et al (19), in 1928 an autopsy series reported a 3% incidence of FDB, whereas in a 1973 autopsy
report, the incidence of FDB increased markedly to 89%. Is it possible that the very low 3% incidence of FDB
reported in the pre-RDA early 1900’s was due to the widespread use of the Lugol solution available then from
local apothecaries; and the recently reported 89% incidence of FDB is due to a trend of decreasing I
consumption (2) with such decreased levels still within RDA limits for I, therefore giving a false sense of I
sufficiency?

The American physician H.S. Plummer was the first in 1923 to use Lugol solution pre- and post- operatively in
his management of Grave’s disease (44). He postulated that the hyperthyroidism of Grave’s disease was due to I
deficiency and that the high mortality rate associated with the post-operative recovery period could be
controlled with I administration pre- and post-operatively. By administering 20-30 drops of Lugol pre-
operatively and 10 drops post-operatively, he reported zero mortality rate. His procedure became widely used
both in the USA and abroad. In 1930, a systematic study was performed by Thompson et al (3) in patients with
Grave’s disease, using a wide range of I intake from Lugol solution, that is from 1/5 drop to 30 drops/day. In
17 hospitalized patients and in 23 outpatients, one drop of Lugol gave the maximum reduction in basal
metabolism toward the normal range in the majority of the patients, following a period of bed rest. One drop of
Lugol contains a total of 6.25 mg, with 40% iodine and 60% iodide as the potassium salt.

Koutras et al (45) administered increasing amounts of iodide from 0.1 to 0.8 mg to normal subjects over a period
of 12 weeks and measured the quantity of I retained by the thyroid gland before an equilibrium with the new
plasma inorganic I was reached. With all the doses administered, a total of 6-7 mg I was accumulated by the
thyroid gland over a period of weeks before equilibrium was reached. Again, around 6 mg was the amount
observed under those physiological manipulations. These authors stated: “From our evidence it appears that,
with all the doses we used, the thyroid took up about 6 to 7 mg of iodine before an equilibrium with the new PII
(Plasma Inorganic I) was reached. It is of some interest that this is approximately the amount of the
intrathyroidal exchangeable iodine”. Based on the above observations and the data displayed in Fig. 2, we
would like to propose that the optimal daily intake for I sufficiency of the thyroid gland is 6 mg, with a
minimum of 3 mg, Saxena’s minimal daily amount (34).

IV. Requirement of the extrathyroidal tissues for I

In 1954, Berson and Yalow (46) postulated that following initial clearance of an administered dose of
radioiodine, the major portion of the radioiodine in the body is distributed between 2 compartments, the
thyroidal and extra thyroidal organic I pools which are in dynamic equilibrium. The results obtained from an
elegant experimental design, revealed that the total exchangeable organic I pool ranged from 7 to 13 mg. The
total organic pool of I observed in Berson and Yalow’s study may correspond to the range of I intake required
daily for I sufficiency of the whole human body. The upper limit of 13 mg I is amazingly close to the upper
limit of 14 mg observed in slope C (Fig. 2), the maximum intake of I that will not trigger down regulation of the
I-trapping mechanism of the thyroid gland.

The amount of I required by the human body for optimal health would not be expected to trigger
downregulation of the I trapping system of the thyroid gland. We are proposing that the upper limit of the
requirement of the whole human body for I would be 14 mg. If 6 mg I is the optimal amount needed for the
thyroid gland, the extra-thyroidal tissues need the difference, that is 14 mg – 6 mg = 8 mg. Although several
extrathyroidal organs and tissues have the capability to concentrate and organify
I (47-49), the most compelling evidence for an extra thyroidal function of I is its effects on the mammary gland.
Eskin et al have published the results of their extensive and excellent studies on the rat model of FDB and breast
cancer and the importance of iodine as an essential element for breast normality and for protection against FDB
and breast cancer (14-16,19,20). The amount of I required for breast normality in the female rats was equivalent
based on body weight, to the amounts required clinically to improve signs and symptoms of FDB. That amount
of I was 0.1 mg I/kg body weight/day. For a 50 kg woman, that daily amount would compute to 5 mg I.

Of interest is the findings of Eskin et al (20) that the thyroid gland preferentially concentrate iodide whereas the
mammary gland favors iodine. In the I-deficient female rats, histological abnormalities of the mammary gland
were corrected more completely and in a larger number of rats treated with iodine than iodide given orally at
equivalent doses. This would suggest that iodine is not reduced to iodide during intestinal absorption. Recent
textbooks of endocrinology continue the tradition of the past, reaffirming that iodine is reduced to iodide prior
to absorption in the intestinal tract, referring to a study by Cohn (50), published in 1932, using segments of the
gastrointestinal tract of dogs, washed clean of all food particles prior to the application of I in the lumen.
However, Thrall and Bull (51) observed that in both fasted and fed rats, the thyroid gland and the skin contained
significantly more I when rats were fed with iodide than with iodine; whereas the stomach walls and stomach
contents had a significantly greater level of I in iodine-fed rats than iodide-fed animals. Peripheral levels of
inorganic I were different with different patterns, when rats were fed with these 2 forms of I. The authors
concluded: “These data lead us to question the view that iodide and iodine are essentially interchangeable”.
Based on the above findings, I supplementation should contain both iodine for the mammary tissue and iodide
for the thyroid gland.

The mammary glands can effectively compete with the thyroid gland for peripheral I. Eskin et al (52) measured
the 24 hr. radioiodide uptake in 57 clinically normal breasts, and in 8 clinically abnormal breasts. The mean ±
SD % uptake was 6.9 ± 0.46% in the normal breasts and 12.5 ± 1% in abnormal breasts. These means were
statistically significant at p <0.005. Considering that these measurements are representative of a single breast
and a woman has 2 breasts, the % uptake per patient is twice these amounts. This brings the 24 hr. radioiodide
uptake by the mammary glands of a woman in the same range as the 24 hr. radioiodide uptake by the thyroid
gland. The higher % uptake in the abnormal breasts suggests that the abnormal breasts were more I deficient
than normal breasts. As previously discussed, endemic goiter is 6 times more common in pubertal girls than
pubertal boys (38). This suggests that in areas of marginal I supply, the larger breast of pubertal girls with
greater I requirement, would leave less I available for thyroid uptake than in pubertal boys, and the expected
outcome would be a greater prevalence of goiter in pubertal girls than boys. The presence of simple goiter in a
female patient is an indication of I deficiency of both the thyroid and mammary glands. Treating such patients
with T4 instead of I supplementation is non physiological and increases their risk of breast cancer (17).

Beside the greater risk for breast cancer in I-deficient women, there is convincing evidence that I deficiency
increases also the risk of thyroid cancer. It is common knowledge that simple goiter due to
I-deficiency, if left without I supplementation, will progress to nodular goiter with some of these nodules
becoming cancerous (30). Since simple goiter is more common in women than in men, because of their greater
need for I, it does not take a supranormal intellect but plain common sense to come to the conclusion that I-
deficiency will eventually result in a greater prevalence of thyroid nodules in women and subsequently a greater
incidence and prevalence of thyroid cancer. Therefore, it is not surprising that with the decreasing trend of I
consumption by the U.S. population (1,2), there is a marked increase in thyroid nodules resulting in 19,500 new
cases of thyroid cancer in 2001, with 14,900 cases in women. This editorial in the May 2002 issue of the
Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism (53) called this increased incidence of thyroid nodules “an
epidemic”. It is amazing that the author of the editorial made no mention of I deficiency as a possible cause for
this “epidemic”, although the connection is very obvious. It is a national tragedy that such preventable diseases
continue to rise in our population as I deficiency becomes more prevalent and self-appointed experts continue to
spread iodophobic misinformation. The guardians of our Nation’s thyroid should be more concerned about
supplying the optimal requirement of the human body for I to the U.S. population; and less zealous in their
crusade to eliminate I from our food supply.

V.   Requirement of the human body for I
So far, the optimal daily requirement for I has been estimated at 6 mg of iodide for the thyroid gland and 5 mg
of iodine for the mammary glands. The adrenal glands may also require adequate levels of I for normal
function. A recent study of female rats exposed to noise stress revealed a decreased adaptability to stress when
these rats were placed on an I-deficient diet. There was an attenuation of the pituitary adrenal axis to stress that
persisted after functional recovery of the pituitary thyroid axis. Therefore, this effect of I on the adrenal
response to stress is totally independent of thyroid hormones.

Certain roles of I in wellbeing and protection against infections, degenerative diseases and cancer may not
involve its action on specific organs and tissues. Instead, such properties of I, affecting every cell in the human
body, may depend on its concentration in biological fluids. Derry (54) has reviewed some beneficial properties
of I: the antimicrobial effect of I in organs capable of concentrating it to reach effective I levels; the apoptotic
property of I in the body’s surveillance mechanism against abnormal cells; the ability of I to trigger
differentiation, moving the cell cycle away from the undifferentiated characteristic of breast cancer, for that
matter of all cancer. Besides, as a halogen, and because of its large size, I has the ability to markedly enhance
the excited singlet to triplet radiationless transition (55). Reactive oxygen species causing damage to DNA and
other macromolecules, are usually excited singlet with a high energy content released rapidly, and characterized
by fluorescence, whereas the corresponding triplet state contains lower energy levels which are released slowly,
expressed as phosphorescence. Such an effect of I would depend on its concentration in biological fluids.
Using a rudimentary phosphoroscope, Szent-Gyorgy was able, 50 years ago, to demonstrate this effect of I on
the singlet → triplet radiationless transition, at a concentration of 10-5 M (56). It is likely that this effect would
persist at 10-6 M, which would correspond to a serum I level of 12.7 ug/100 ml. Such a level is easily achieved
with I intake in the range consumed by mainland Japanese. This effect of I would markedly decrease the
oxydative burden of the body, having a beneficial impact upon degenerative diseases and cancer. Protection of
the thyroid from radioiodine fall out in cases of nuclear attack and accident would benefit from the
recommended daily intake of I, discussed above. The equivalent of 2 drops of Lugol solution (12.5 mg I) daily
would maintain a low radioiodine uptake by the thyroid gland (3-4%). Since the greatest damage to the thyroid
occurs during the first few hours of radiation
exposure (57), this recommended level of I would serve as a prevention in cases of unexpected exposure.

Collective experience may have played a role in the choice of 2 drops of Lugol daily for I supplementation (43).
Amazingly, 0.1 ml (2 drops) of Lugol contains 5 mg iodine and 7.5 mg iodide as the potassium salt, the near
perfect total amount of I and ratio of iodine over iodide, for sufficiency of the thyroid and mammary glands.
This amount of Lugol solution would then represents an ideal form of orthoiodosupplementation. Based on the
above criteria for I sufficiency of the whole human body, the mainland Japanese represent the only population
in the world consuming adequate amounts of I. Thyroid function is higher in normal Japanese woman, a low
risk population for breast cancer than in normal British women who are at high risk for breast cancer (11). When
5 different ethnic groups living in Hawaii were compared with British women and mainland Japanese women,
the latter showed the highest serum levels of Free T4. There was a significant and inverse correlation (p<0.001)
between serum Free T4 and the incidence of breast cancer in these 7 groups with mainland Japanese women
showing the lowest incidence (11,12). Since T4 therapy in I-deficient women increased their risk for breast cancer
(17)
     , the significant correlation between serum Free T4 and breast cancer is not necessarily indicative of a
protective role of T4. Instead, this correlation may point to the higher I levels in Japanese women, expressed as
increased thyroid function. Prasad et al (58) reported significantly lower serum T4 and higher serum T3 levels in
40 women with histologically confirmed breast cancer, compared to 10 normal controls. Although these
authors did not measure urine I levels in those cases, the pattern they reported in women with breast cancer is
typical of I deficiency: increased T3 levels and lower T4 levels to compensate for the limited availability of I (30).

VI.    Physician-supervised orthoiodosupplementation

Based on the information previously discussed, the optimal daily I intake for I sufficiency of the whole human
body would be equivalent to 2 drops of Lugol solution. In the USA, the initial implementation of I
supplementation at this level would require medical supervision. Administration of I in liquid solution is not
very accurate, may stain clothing, has an unpleasant taste and causes gastric irritation. We decided to use a
precisely quantified tablet form containing 5 mg iodine and 7.5 mg iodide as the potassium salt. To prevent
gastric irritation, the iodine/iodide preparation was absorbed unto a colloidal silica excipient; and to eliminate
the unpleasant taste of iodine, the tablets were coated with a thin film of pharmaceutical glaze.

Our preliminary experience with I supplementation at 12.5 mg/day, confirmed the findings of Ghent et al (19),
regarding subjective and objective improvements of FDB, following I supplementation. Our findings in 3
patients with Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome (PCOS) confirmed the positive response observed following
supplementation with 10 to 20 mg of potassium iodide by Russian investigators 40 years ago (62). Prior to I
supplementation, those PCOS patients were olygomenorrheic, menstruating one or twice a year. Following I
supplementation for 3 months, they resumed normal monthly cycles. In 2 patients with subclinical
hypothyroidism and elevated TSH levels, I supplementation suppressed TSH levels markedly in both cases. In
one patient, serum TSH level was 7.8 mIU/L pre-supplementation and 1.7 mIU/L 3 months post I
supplementation. In the other patient, TSH level was 21.5 mIU/L before and 11.9 mIU/L after 3 months of I
supplementation.

Surprisingly, this program improved the symptoms of tremor and restless legs, two symptoms usually present in
neurologic cretinism (59). There was some evidence of improved T3 receptor responsiveness, reflected by a
decreased need for T3 in some patients previously receiving this hormone. One female patient with normal size
and echopattern of the thyroid gland required 45 ug T3 to maintain clinical euthyroidism. Following I
supplementation at 12.5 mg/day, she was able to titrate her daily dose of T3 down to 7.5 ug during the first
month of I supplementation. Previously, missing one or 2 days of T3 elicited symptoms. Currently, she noticed
that she can remain asymptomatic without T3 for one week. TSH levels in this patient were below detection
limits prior to I supplementation. Over the last 12 months on I supplementation, TSH levels are maintained
between 1 and 2.5 mIU/L. The calculated T3 secretion rate by the normal thyroid gland varies between 4.6 and
8.3 ug/day. (Chopra, I.J., and Sabatino, L., In Werner and Ingbar’s The Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger R-
D. Editors Lippincott, p123, 2000). Therefore, with adequate supply of endogenous or exogenous T4, the daily
need for exogenous T3 should not exceed 8.3 ug to maintain clinical euthyroidism. Is it possible that the large
number of patients currently on supraphysiologic levels of T3 to maintain clinical euthyroidism are in reality I
deficient by our definition of I sufficiency of the whole human body? Could it be that all they need is
orthoiodosupplementation?

Eskin and Ghent have observed a modulating role of I at levels of 0.1 mg/kg body weight/day in the response of
mammary tissue to estrogens (14-16,19). We have some evidence of improved T3 receptor function in female
patients receiving 12.5 mg I/day. T3 and steroid hormones share the same superfamily of receptors for
hydrophobic small molecules (60). Clur (61) has postulated that iodination of thyrosine residues in the
hydrophobic portion of these receptors normalized their response to the corresponding hormones. Optimal
intake of I in amounts 2 orders of magnitude greater than I levels needed for goiter control, may be required for
iodination of these receptors. Our observation has important clinical implications. If optimal intake of I
reduces the need for exogenous T3, one would expect the same effect of I supplementation on endogenous T3. I
intake below optimal levels would result in clinical hypothyroidism in the presence of normal levels of thyroid
hormones because of decreased T3 receptor function. If this common condition is due to Iodine deficiency, the
proper treatment would then be orthoiodosupplementation.

VII. Epilogue

Such high requirements for I in an environment depleted of this element, do not have a logical explanation.
Unless sometimes in the distant past, the top soil of planet earth contains significant levels of I and meeting
these high requirements for I sufficiency could then be achieved with any diet. The theory of evolution does not
offer an intellectually satisfying answer to this paradox. However, the Biblical account of the origin of the
world through creation 6000 years ago followed by the fall of man and the flood fits very well the current
situation. According to the biblical narrative, the Creator declared planet earth and everything in it perfect.
Therefore, the original planet earth contained a top soil rich in I, and all elements required for perfect health of
Adam, Eve and their descendants. A rebelled archangel was expelled from God’s Habitation for attempting a
hostile takeover (Isaiah 14:12-15). His name was Lucifer before the attempt (Isaiah 14:12) and Satan after his
expulsion (Luke 10:18). Satan deceived Eve into believing that she could become a goddess by disobeying her
Creator (Genesis 3:4,5). A sequence of events followed, culminating in the worldwide flood 4500 years ago.
Following this episode, the receding waters washed away the top soil with all its elements into oceans and seas.
The new top soil became deficient in I and most likely other essential elements, whose essentialities are still
unknown. Mountainous areas became the most I-deficient because the receding waters were the most rapid
over the steep slopes, eroding deeper into the soil. The post-deluvian worldwide I deficiency may be a reminder
to mankind of the flood, their fallen state and their need for a Redeemer.


                                                  References
1)     Editorial: What’s Happening to Our Iodine? J. Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism, 33:3398-3400,
       1998.

2)     Hollowell J., Staehling N., Hannon W., Flanders D., Gunter E., Maberly G., Iodine Nutrition in the
       United States. Trends and Public Health Implications: Iodine Excretion Data from National Health and
       Nutrition Examination Surveys I and III (1971-1974 and 1988-1994) J. Clinical Endocrinology and
       Metabolism, 83:3401-3408, 1998.

3)     Thompson, W.O., Brailey, A.G., Thompson, P.K., et al, the Range of Effective Iodine Dosage in
       Exophthalmic Goiter. Arch. Int. Med., 45:261-281, 1930.

4)     Dunn, J., Iodine Supplementation and the Prevention of Cretinism. Annals of the New York Academy of
       Sciences, 678: 158-168, 1993.

5)     Utiger, R.D., Thyrotoxicosis, Hypothyroidism, and the Painful Thyroid. In Endocrinology &
       Metabolism, Felig, P., Frohman, L.A., Ed, McGRAW-HILL, Inc Medical Publishing Division, 2001,
       p275.

6)     Arem, R., The Thyroid Solution. Ballantine Publishing Group, N.Y., 1999.

7)     Harach, R., Williams, E.D., Thyroid cancer and thyroiditis in the goitrous region of Salta, Argentina,
       before and after iodine prophylaxis. Clin Endocrinol, 43:701-706, 1995.

8)     Hintze, G., Emrich, D., Kobberling, J., Treatment of endemic goitre due to iodine deficiency with iodine,
       levothyroxine or both: results of a multicentre trial. European Journal of Clinical Investigation, 19:527-
       534, 1989.

9)     Wiseman, R., Breast cancer hypothesis: a single cause for the majority of cases. J Epid Comm Health,
       54:851-858, 2000.

10)    Finley, J.W., Bogardus, G.M., Breast cancer and thyroid disease. Quart. Rev. Surg. Obstet. Gynec.
       17:139-147, 1960.

11)    Thomas, B.S., Bulbrook, R.D., Russell, M.J., et al, Thyroid function in early breast cancer. Enrop. J.
       Cancer clin, Oncol, 19:1213-1219, 1983.
12)   Thomas, B.S., Bulbrook, R.D., Goodman, M.J., Thyroid Function and the Incidence of Breast Cancer in
      Hawaiian, British and Japanese Women. Int. J. Cancer, 38:325-329, 1986.

13)   Smyth, P., Thyroid Disease and Breast Cancer, J. Endo. Int., 16:396-401, 1993.

14)   Eskin B., Bartuska D., Dunn M., Jacob G., Dratman M., Mammary Gland Dysplasia in Iodine
      Deficiency, JAMA, 200:115-119, 1967.

15)   Eskin, B., Iodine Metabolism and Breast Cancer. Trans. New York, Acad. of Sciences, 32:911-947,
      1970.

16)   Eskin B., Iodine and Mammary Cancer, Adv. Exp. Med. Biol., 91:293-304, 1977.

17)   Ghandrakant, C., Kapdim MD, Wolfe, J.N., Breast Cancer. Relationship to Thyroid Supplements for
      Hypothyroidism. JAMA, 238:1124, 1976.

18)   Backwinkel, K., Jackson, A.S., Some Features of Breast Cancer and Thyroid Deficiency. Cancer
      17:1174-1176, 1964.

19)   Ghent, W., Eskin, B., Low, D., Hill, L., Iodine Replacement in Fibrocystic Disease of the Breast, Can. J.
      Surg., 36:453-460, 1993.

20)   Eskin, B., Grotkowski, C.E., Connolly, C.P., et al, Different Tissue Responses for Iodine and Iodide in
      Rat Thyroid and Mammary Glands. Biological Trace Element Research, 49:9-19, 1995.

21)   Roti, E., Vagenakis, A.G., Effect of Excess Iodide: Clinical Aspects. In Werner and Ingbar’s The
      Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger R-D. Ed, Lippincott, 316-329, 2000.

22)   Nagataki, S., Shizume, K., Nakao, K., Thyroid Function in Chronic Excess Iodide Ingestion:
      Comparison of Thyroidal Absolute Iodine Uptake and Degradation of Thyroxine in Euthyroid Japanese
      Subjects, J. Clin Endo: 27:638-647, 1967.

23)   Waterhouse, J., Shanmvgakatnam, K., et al, Cancer incidence in five continents. LARC Scientific
      Publications, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 1982.

24)   Pittman et al, Thyroidal Radioiodine Uptake. N. Engl. J. Med., 280:1431-1434, 1969.

25)   Mizukami, Y., Funaki, N., Hashimoto, T., et al, Histologic Features of Thyroid Gland in a Patient with
      Bromide-Induced Hypothyroidism. Am. J. Clin. Pathol 89:802-805, 1988.

26)   Lakshmy, P., Rao, S., Sesikeran, B., et al, Iodine Metabolism in Response to Goitrogen Induced Altered
      Thyroid Status Under Conditions of Moderate and High Intake of Iodine. Hormone & Metabolic Res.
      27:450-454, 1995.

27)   Editorial: Guarding our Nation’s Thyroid Health. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism,
      87:486-488, 2002.

28)   Gutekunst, R., Smolarch, H., Hasenpusch, U., Goitre epidemiology: thyroid volume, iodine excretion,
      thyroglobulin and thyrotropin in Germany and Sweden. Acta Endocrinologica, 112:494-501, 1986.
29)   Merovi, E., Molner, I., Jukab, A., et al, Prevalence of iodine deficiency and goitre during pregnancy in
      east Hungary. European Journal of Endocrinology, 143:479-483, 2000.

30)   Delange, F.M., Iodine Deficiency. In Werner and Ingbar’s The Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger R-
      D. Editors Lippincott, 295-329, 2000.

31)   Karmarkar, M.C., Deo, M.G., Kochupillar, N., Pathophysiology of Himalayan endemic goiter. Am. J. of
      Clinical Nutr, 27:96-103, 1974.

32)   Wartofsky, L., Ingbar, S.H., Estimation of the Rate of Release of Non-thyroixine Iodine from the Thyroid
      Glands of Normal Subjects and Patients with Thyroitoxicosis. J. Clin. Endo, 33:488-500, 1971.

33)   Becker, D.V., Zanzonico, P. Potassium Iodide for Thyroid Blockade in a Reactor Accident:
      Administrative Policies That Govern Its Use. Thyroid, 7:193-197, 1997.

34)   Saxena, K.M., Chapman, E.M., Pryles, C.V., Minimal Dosage of Iodide Required to Suppress Uptake of
      Iodine-131 by Normal Thyroid. Science, 138:430-431, 1962.

35)   Cuddihy, R.G., Thyroidal Iodine-131 Uptake, Turnover and Blocking in Adults and Adolescents. Health
      Physics, 12:1021-1025, 1966.

36)   Hamilton, J.G., Soley, M.H., Studies in iodine metabolism of the thyroid gland in Situ by the use of
      radio-iodine in normal subjects and in patients with various types of goiter. Am. J. Physiol., 131:135-
      143, 1940.

37)   Sternthal, E., Lipworth, L., Stanley, B., et al, Suppression of Thyroid Radioiodine Uptake by Various
      Doses of Stable Iodide. N. Engl. J. Med., 303:1083-1088, 1980.

38)   Marine D., Kimball, B.S., The Prevention of Simple Goiter in Man, J. Lab Clin Med., 3:40-48, 1917.

39)   Wiersinga, W.M., Subclinical hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. I. Prevalence and clinical
      relevance. Netherlands J. Med., 46:197-204, 1995.

40)   Vanderpump, P.J., Tunbridge, W.M., French, N. The incidence of thyroid disorders in the community: a
      twenty-year follow-up of the Whickham Survey. Med. Endo, 43:55-66, 1990.

41)   Wagner Jr., H.N., Nelp, W.B., Dowling, J.H., Use of Neutron Activation Analysis for Studying Stable
      Iodide Uptake. Thyroid. J. Clin. Invest., 40:1984-1992, 1961.

42)   Fisher, D.A., Oddie, T.H., Eppersonn, D., Effect of Increased Dietary Iodide on Thyroid Accumulation
      and Secretion in Euthyroid Arkansas Subjects. J. Clin. Endocr., 25:1580-1590, 1965.

43)   Gennaro A.R., Remington: The Science and Practice of Pharmacy, 19th Edition, 1995, Mack Publishing
      Co, 1267.

44)   Plummer, H.S., Results of Administering Iodin to Patients having Exophthalmic Goiter. J.AMA,
      80:1955, 1923.

45)   Koutras, D.A., Alexander, W.D., Harden, R. McG., et al, Effect of Small Iodine Supplements on Thyroid
      Function in Normal Individuals. J. Clin. Endocr., 24:857-862, 1964.
46)   Berson, S.A., Yalow, R.S., Quantitative Aspects of Iodine Metabolism. The Exchangeable Organic
      Iodine Pool, and the Rates of Thyroidal Secretion, Peripheral Degradation and Fecal Excretion of
      Endogenously Synthesized Organically Bound Iodine. J. Clin. Invest, 33:1533-1552, 1954.

47)   Freinkel N., Ingbar S., The Metabolism of I by Surviving Slices of Rat Mammary Tissue, Endo, 58:51-56,
      1956.

48)   Schiff L., Stevens C.D., Molle W.E., Steinberg H., Kumpe C., Stewart P., Gastric (and Salivary)
      Excretion of Radioiodine in Man (Preliminary Report), J. Nat. Can. Inst., 7:349-356, 1947.

49)   Banerjee R., Bose A., Chakraborty T., De S., Datta A., Peroxidase-catalysed iodotyrosine formation in
      dispersed cell of mouse extrathyroidal tissues,
      J. Endocr., 106:159-165, 1985.

50)   Cohn, B., Absorption of Compound Solution of Iodine from the Gastro-Intestinal Tract, Arch Intern
      Med, 49:950-956, 1932.

51)   Thrall, K., Bull, R.J., Differences in the Distribution of Iodine and Iodide in the Sprague-Dawley Rat.
      Fundamental and Applied Toxicology, 15:75-81, 1990.

52)   Eskin, B.A., J.A. Parker, J.G. Bassett, et al, Human Breast Uptake of Radioactive Iodine. OB-GYN,
      44:398-402, 1974.

53)   Editorial: Nonpalpable Thyroid Nodules – Managing an Epidemic. J. Clin. Endo & Metabolism,
      87:1938-1940, 2002.

54)   Derry, D., Breast Cancer and Iodine, Trafford Publishing, Victoria B.C., 92, 2001.

55)   Kasha, M., Collisional Perturbation of Spin-Orbital Coupling and the Mechanism of Fluorescence
      Quenching. A Visual Demonstration of the Perturbation. The Journal of Chemical Physics, 20:71-74,
      1952.

56)   Szent-Gyorgyi, A., Bioenergetics. Academic Press, NY, 1957, p113.

57)   Zanzonico, P.B., Becker, D.V., Effects of time of administration and dietary iodine levels on potassium
      iodide (KI) blockade of thyroid irradiation by 131I from radioactive fallout. Health Physics Journal,
      78:660-668, 2000.

58)   Prasad, G.C., Singh, A.K., Raj, R., Pineal-thyroid Relationship in Breast Cancer. Indian Journal of
      Cancer, 22:108-113, 1988.

59)   Delange, F.M., Endemic Cretinism. In Werner and Ingbar’s The Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger R-
      D. Editors Lippincott, 743-751, 2000.

60)   Evans, R.M., The steroid and thyroid hormone receptor superfamily. Science 240:889, 1988.

61)   Clur, A., DI-Iodothyronine as Part of the Oestradiol and Catechol Oestrogen Receptor – The Role of
      Iodine, Thyroid Hormones and Metatonin in the Aetiology of Breast Cancer. Med Hypothesis 27:303-
      311, 1988.

62)   Vishnyakova, V.V., Murav’yeva, N.L., On the Treatment of Dyshormonal Hyperplasia of Mammary
