The Saliva/Serum Iodide 
Ratio as an Index of  
Sodium Iodide 
Symporter Efficiency 

by Guy E. Abraham, MD, David Brownstein, MD, 
and JD Flechas, MD 

Introduction 
The  essential  element  iodine  is  present  in  every  organ 
and tissue of the human body, not just the thyroid gland.1  
Several cells beside the thyrocyte concentrate peripheral 
iodide against a gradient.  So far, the list of these iodide 
concentrating cells besides the thyrocyte has increased to 
include:  white blood cells, salivary and lacrimal glands, 
the ciliary body of the eye, the renal cortex, the pancreas, 
the liver, gastric, small, and large intestinal mucosa, the 
nasopharynx,  the  choroid  plexus,  skin,  the  adrenal  cor-
tex,  mammary  glands,  placenta,  uterus and ovaries.2-6 and 
vide infra  In the target cells studied, the mechanism used to 
concentrate  peripheral 
involved  an  energy-
iodide 
dependant  transport  of  one  atom  of  iodide  sandwiched 
between  two  atoms  of  sodium  across  the  cell  mem-
brane.7 

Recently, a second mechanism for the cellular transport 
of  iodine  has  been  reported  by  several  investigators  in 
the  thyroid,  the  mammary  gland,  and  the  renal  cortex, 
namely  a  chloride/iodide  transporter  identified  as  pen-
drin.8-13  The iodine transporter, pendrin, was speculated 
to  function  at  the  apical  membrane  of  the  cell.    Rodri-
guez,  et  al14  identified  a  third  human  protein,  homolo-
gous to NIS at the apical membrane of the human thyro-
cyte.  This new protein does not catalyze the accumula-
tion of iodide like NIS, but mediates its passive transfer.  
It  was  designated  as  human  apical  iodide  transporter 
(hAIT). 

In  the  thyrocyte,  the  sodium/iodide  symporter  (NIS)  is 
located  in  the  basolateral  membrane.    The  peripheral 
iodide enters the thyrocyte via the symporter in the basal 
membrane and crosses the thyrocyte as iodide to exit the 
thyrocyte via the apical membrane transporter just prior 
to oxidation and organification.  In the case of the sym-
porter, iodide must bind to a site called the halide sym-
porter  binding  site  before  cellular  uptake.    Other  sub-
stances  compete  with  iodide  for  these  binding  sites.  
These  competing  substances  are  called  goitrogens,  be-
cause they sometimes cause goiter by creating a relative 

iodide deficiency in the thyroid gland.  These substances 
also interfere with iodide transport and utilization in sev-
eral  organs  besides  the thyroid  gland,  and  a better  term 
would be “iodide transport inhibitors” or “iodide utiliza-
tion  inhibitors”  instead  of  goitrogens,  depending  on 
whether the inhibition is at the cell membrane transport 
system  or  at  intracellular  sites  of  iodide  oxidation  and 
utilization.   

Iodine  deficiency  caused  by  these  inhibitors  is  some-
times  relative  because  peripheral  iodide  levels  may  be 
adequate, but the target cells are starving for iodide be-
cause these iodide transport inhibitors prevent the trans-
fer of peripheral iodide across the cell membrane of the 
target cell for iodide utilization.  Some iodide inhibitors, 
like  fluoride  and  perchlorate,  bind  to  the  halide  site  of 
the symporter without being symported inside the cells.  
They cause oxidative damage to the halide binding site.  
Fluoride  and  perchlorate  are  iodide  transport  inhibitors.  
Bromide  and  thiocyanate  not  only  attach  to  the  halide 
binding  site  but  are  also  transported  inside  the  target 
cells,  causing  further  damage  by  preventing  oxidation 
and  organification  of  iodide.    Bromide  and  thiocyanate 
are  both  iodide  transport  and  iodide  utilization  inhibi-
tors.2 

A simple test to assess the efficiency of the iodide cellu-
lar  transport  system  is  greatly  needed  in  order  to  quan-
tify  the  degree  of  defect/damage/inhibition  of  that  sys-
tem  in  patients  with  decreased  efficiency  of  the  iodide 
transport system.  The saliva radioiodide/serum radioio-
dide ratio is used in neonates with elevated TSH and low 
thyroid hormone levels in order to confirm a congenital 
iodide  symporter  defect.15    The  procedure  involves  in-
jecting radioactive iodide into the neonate and measuring 
the ratio of radioactivity between saliva and serum.  Ac-
cording to Viljder and Vulsma, a ratio >10 is considered 
normal,  3-10  —  borderline,  and  <3  —  abnormal.  
“Partial  iodide  transport  defect  is  an  ill-defined  condi-
tion;  if  it  exists,  the  diagnostic  test  results  depend  en-
tirely  on  the  iodine  intake,  which  varies  greatly  world-
wide.”15 

Stable iodide, instead of radioactive iodide, as the means 
to  assess  the  efficiency  of  the  iodide  transport  system 
has  not  been  previously  reported  because  of  technical 
difficulties in measuring low levels of iodine in biologi-
cal  fluids.    Measurement  of  stable  iodide  in  serum  and 
saliva under standardized conditions seems the ideal pro-
cedure for fine tuning the assessment of the iodide trans-
port efficiency, and it is the least invasive way to assess 
response  of  the  symporter  function  following  interven-
tion.    This  approach  would  obviate  the  need  to  expose 
(Continued on next page) 

152 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Winter   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the  patient  to  radioactive  iodide.    A  ratio  near  unity 
would  indicate  a  severe  defect/damage/inhibition  of  the 
symporter  function.    An  increase  in  the  ratio  following 
intervention  would  reflect  an  improvement  in  the  sym-
porter  function.    The  data  presented  in  this  preliminary 
communication  suggest  that  the  saliva/serum  iodide  ra-
tio, using a stable iodide load, may be of value in assess-
ing  iodide  transport  efficiency  prior  to,  and  following, 
nutritional intervention. 

Theoretical Considerations 
The expected serum inorganic iodide level under steady 
state conditions would be equal to the average daily in-
take  of  elemental  iodine  divided  by  the  renal  clearance 
rate  of  iodide,  that  is  43.5  L/day  as  we  previously  re-
ported.16    With  an  average  daily  intake  of  iodine  at  the 
level  of  the  US  RDA  of  0.15  mg/day,  the  expected  se-
rum  level  of  iodide  would  be  0.0034  mg/L  (0.15  mg/L 
divided by 43.5 L/day).  This level is below the sensitiv-
ity of our assay:  0.006 mg/L.16,17  To measure accurately 
the concentration of iodide in serum and saliva, a load of 
50  mg  iodine  is  ingested  and  the  samples  of  biological 
fluids  are  collected  24  hours  later.    Based  on  our  pub-
lished  data,17  the  levels  of  serum  inorganic  iodide  24 
hours  following  50  mg  of  iodine/iodide  were  markedly 
above the sensitivity of our assay in normal subjects un-
d e r  
p o s t -
o f  
orthoiodosupplementation. 

c o n d i t i o n s  

p r e -  

a n d  

Assessing  whole  body  iodine  sufficiency  and  iodide 
symporter function can be performed following the same 
loading test.  A 24-hour urine collection is initiated after 
50  mg  iodine  is  ingested.    Twenty-four  hours  after  the 
load, serum and saliva samples are obtained.  For assess-
ing whole body iodine sufficiency, the percentage of the 
load  recovered  in  the  24-hour  urine  collection  is  meas-
ured  in  an  aliquot  of  urine.    Using  one  sample  each  of 
urine,  serum,  and  saliva  24  hours  following  the  iodine/
iodide  load,  whole  body  iodine  sufficiency,  as  well  as 
the efficiency of the iodide transport system in the whole 
human body, can be evaluated. 

p a t i e n t s  

Results 
In  order  to  test  the  validity  of  the  saliva/serum  iodide 
ratio  as  an  index  of  the  efficiency  of  iodide  transport 
mechanism,  we  compared the ratios  obtained in normal 
subjects who achieved whole body sufficiency for iodine 
w i t h  
p o s t -
p r i o r  
orthoiodosupplementation.    We  first  established  a  nor-
mal range of values based on data obtained in 14 normal 
subjects  (five  males  and  nine  females)  who  achieved 
whole body sufficiency for iodine.  The mean ± SD for 
the saliva/serum ratios of iodide in these 14 subjects was 
44.2±13.7 with a range of 28-74.  The mean ± SD for the 
serum iodide levels 24 hours post-load in the same sub-
jects were 0.76±0.17 mg/L.   

a n d  

t o  

The  following  information  summarizes  our  findings  on 
the 24-hour post-load serum iodide levels.  Serum inor-
ganic iodide levels were measured serially for 24 hours 
following  the  ingestion  of  four  tablets  of  Iodoral®  (50 
mg) in six normal women with normal body weight prior 
to orthoiodosupplementation.  The serum levels of inor-
ganic  iodide  24-hour  post-load  were  0.45±0.051  mg/L 
(mean  ±  SD).17    Following  three  months  of  orthoiodo-
supplementation  at  50  mg/day  in  eight  normal  subjects 
(three males and five females) who achieved whole body 
sufficiency for iodine, the 24-hour post-load serum inor-
ganic iodide were 1.1±0.18 mg/L.16 

The Procedure 
The subject ingests 50 mg of elemental iodine.  For the 
loading test, the amount of the load excreted in the fol-
lowing  24-hour  urine  collection  is  measured.    Whole 
body  sufficiency  for  iodine  is  achieved  when  90%  or 
more of the load is recovered in the 24-hour urine collec-
tion.18    For  the  iodide  transport  efficiency  test,  24±2 
hours  following  the  intake  of  the  50  mg  load,  a  serum 
sample is collected concomitant with a sample of mixed 
saliva.  Iodide levels in the serum and saliva samples are 
measured using the ion-selective electrode procedure we 
described previously.2,18 

In  patients  with  an  inefficient  cellular  iodide  transport 
mechanism,  the  absorbed  iodine/iodide  is  rapidly  ex-
creted  in  the  urine  resulting  in  low  serum  iodide  levels 
24 hours following a load of 50 mg iodine/iodide.19  In 
seven patients not on orthoiodosupplementation and with 
24-hour  post-load  serum  iodide  levels  below  0.1  mg/L 
(normal is 0.45±0.051 mg/L), the mean ± SD of serum/
saliva iodide ratio was 4.1±1.5. 

In  one  female  patient  with  breast  cancer  and  elevated 
serum bromide level, following six weeks on orthoiodo-
supplementation  at  100  mg  iodine/day,  serum  bromide 
levels  dropped  10-fold  and  saliva/serum  ratio  increased 
three-fold.  Although this patient was taking iodine prior 
to this study, we do not have data on serum bromide and 
saliva/serum  iodide  ratio  previous  to  this  intervention.  
At the beginning of this study, her serum bromide level 
was 121 mg/L (normal range 3-12 mg/L) and her saliva/
serum ratio was 22.  Following six weeks at 100 mg io-
dine/day, serum bromide was 12.7 mg/L and the saliva/
serum ratio increased to 61. 

In another female patient with breast cancer on orthoio-
dosupplementation  for  several  months  at  50-75  mg  io-
dine,  the  saliva/serum  iodide  ratio  was  48.    After  de-
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Winter   2005 

153 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
creasing  the  iodine  intake  to  25  mg/day  for  six  weeks, 
the ratio dropped to 24.  In a normal male volunteer on 
orthoiodosupplementation  at  12.5  mg/day,  for  several 
months,  the  serum  bromide  level  was  elevated  at  127 
mg/L  and  the  saliva/serum  iodide  ratio  was  9.3.    After 
six weeks at 50 mg/day, the serum bromide decreased to 
37.3 mg/L, and the ratio increased five time (48.6).  In a 
female patient with elevated serum fluoride level at 0.32 
mg/L  (normal  range:  0.001-0.048  mg/L),  and  a  saliva/
serum  iodide  ratio  of  1.1,  orthoiodosupplementation  at 
50  mg/day  and  vitamin  C  at  3  g/day  for  six  weeks  re-
sulted in a decrease in serum fluoride at 0.13 mg/L, and 
the saliva/serum iodide ratio increased to 47. 

We previously reported a case of iodide transport defect 
with elevated bromide levels that responded to low dose 
iodine (half tablet of Iodoral®/day) and vitamin C at 3 g/
day.19  This patient was hypothyroid on Synthroid at 50 
µg/day.  Following the nutritional intervention, she was 
able  to  stop  the  thyroid  hormone.    Following  three 
months  off  all  nutritional  supplementation,  her  saliva/
serum iodide ratio was 3.5.  We do not have data on sa-
liva/serum ratios prior to this current study.  We plan to 
repeat  this  ratio  following  reinstatement  of  the  nutri-
tional program.  The negative correlation between serum 
bromide  levels  and  the  saliva/serum  iodide  ratios  ob-
served  in  the  patients  reported  in  this  article  strongly 
suggests that bromide interferes with the cellular uptake 
of iodide.  More research is needed to identify the lowest 
serum  bromide  levels  that  result  in  significant  interfer-
ence with the iodide transport system. 

Discussion 
The  saliva/serum  iodide  ratio  is  currently  used  to  diag-
nose congenital iodide transport defect in newborns with 
elevated TSH and low thyroid hormone levels.15  How-
ever,  radioiodide  is  used  in  this  test,  not  stable  iodide.  
Congenital NIS defect as a cause of congenital hypothy-
roidism  is  extremely  rare,  with  only  38  cases  reported 
worldwide.2  In one case of homozygous missense muta-
tion of NIS, a saliva/serum radioiodide ratio of 1.6 was 
reported.20    This  patient  responded  to  potassium  iodide 
therapy.    There  is  no  consensus  in  the  literature  on  the 
normal  range  of  the  saliva/serum  iodide  ratio.    Viljder 
and Vulsma15 stated that a value above 10 is considered 
normal, whereas Miki, et al20 think a normal ratio should 
be  above  20.    Although  congenital  hypothyroidism  due 
to  sodium/iodide  symporter  defect  is  extremely  rare, 
milder  forms  of  iodine/iodide  transport  defect/damage 
throughout  the  whole  body  may  be  more  common  and 
undetected.2 

We  have  decided  to  investigate  the  potential  diagnostic 
and  prognostic  value  of  a  standardized  procedure  for 

assessing  the  saliva/serum  iodide  ratio,  using  the  stable 
form  of  iodine  instead  of  radioiodide.    Our  first  choice 
was  to  collect  parotid  saliva  through  a  parotid  gland 
canula.    However,  this  would  require  a  special  setup 
which  is  not  commonly  available.    Mixed  saliva  was 
then used and collected by spitting into a container after 
rinsing  the  mouth  with  water.    The  preliminary  results 
obtained  with  this  procedure  suggest  that  the  saliva/
serum stable iodide ratio is a very sensitive index of io-
dide  symporter  function  pre-  and  post-nutritional  inter-
vention.   

Published  data  suggest  that  iodide  symporter  malfunc-
tion may play a role in several clinical conditions.  Sera 
from  breast  cancer  patients  block  the  cellular  uptake  of 
radioiodide  using  an  in  vitro  system.21    The  concentra-
tion of iodine in breast tissue from breast cancer is four 
times  lower  than  breast  tissue  with  benign  breast  dis-
ease.21  A significant difference in spot urine iodide lev-
els  was  observed  between  smokers  and  non-smokers  in 
women  attending  a  university  breast  center.22    Because 
of the increased serum thiocyanate levels in smokers,23,24 
a decreased efficiency of the symporter system would be 
expected.    This  can  now  be  confirmed  with  the  saliva/
serum iodide ratio. 

The serum of 15% of patients with Hashimoto’s thyroid-
itis and 84% of patients with Graves’ disease have anti-
bodies  against  NIS.25    Using  fluorescence  excitation 
analysis  (FEA)  to  measure  the  amount  of  stable  (non-
radioactive) iodine in the thyroid gland, very low levels 
of  thyroidal  iodine  have  been  reported  in  Hashimoto’s 
thyroiditis.    Palmer,  et  al26  reported  a  mean  ±  SD  of 
10.3±2.2 mg in 15 normal men, 8.2±2.5 mg in 43 normal 
women and 4.4±3.1 mg in 30 cases of Hashimoto’s thy-
roiditis.    Okerlund,27  likewise,  published  values  of 
9.9±4.5 mg in 26 men and 9.2±4.3 mg in 41 women.  In 
cases of Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, euthyroid patients had 
a  mean  ±  SD  of  4.8±3.7  mg  and  hypothyroid  patients 
2.3±2 mg.   

The ideal set-up for the evaluation and follow-up of pa-
tients  with  iodide  transport  defect  on  nutritional  inter-
vention  should include  measurement  of  stable  iodide  in 
the thyroid gland by FEA.  This would require the avail-
ability  of  equipment  for  performing  FEA.    Unfortu-
nately,  there  is  a  moratorium  in  the  US  on  the  use  of 
FEA  to  measure  thyroidal  stable  iodine  content,  proba-
bly because it exposes the harmful effect of radioiodide 
and  thyroid  hormones  in  depleting  the  thyroid  gland  of 
iodine  in  patients  not  supplemented  with  iodine.2    In  a 
recent  textbook  on  thyroid  cancer,28  published  in  2000, 
Wartofsky  wrote:    “Fluorescent  thyroid  scanning  offers 
(Continued on next page) 

154 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Winter   2005 

 
 
 
 
 
 
special  advantages  in  childhood  and  pregnancy  due  to 
minimal  radiation  exposure.    The  procedure  has  been 
said to  be  nearly  100% sensitive  but  only  64%  specific 
when cold areas are taken as positive results.  The proce-
dure  employs  241Am,  which  has  the  ability  to  excite 
thyroidal iodine causing release of X-rays that quantita-
tively correlate with iodine content of the imaged tissue.  
Unfortunately,  the  required  equipment  is  not  widely 
available  and  accumulated  data  remain  too  limited  to 
recommend standard use of this technique.” 

From a review of the literature, Wartofsky’s statement is 
true for the US but not Western Europe, Japan, and Rus-
sia.  Although US physicians are totally unaware of this 
technology, which was invented in the US by Hoffer in 
1971,29  it  is  routinely  used  in  Europe.    Jonckheer  and 
Deconinck30 wrote in 1982:  “After a preliminary inves-
tigative period, XRF scintigraphies are done routinely in 
our  department,  and  the  purpose  of  this  review  is  to 
share our experience of more than 2,000 such determina-
tions with those that might be interested.”  

Published  data  on  the  safe  and  useful  applications  of 
FEA for both scanning of the thyroid gland and quantifi-
cation of intrathyroidal iodine suggest that it is safer and 
more  informative  than  radioisotope  scanning.    Some 
quotes follow. 

“Twenty-one  patients  in  this  series  demonstrated  single 
or  multiple  ‘cold’  nodules  on  either  the  fluorescent  or 
the radioisotope scan.  No ‘cold’ nodule seen on the ra-
dioisotope  scan  was  missed  by  the  fluorescent  scan.  
However,  the  fluorescent  scan  did  pick  up  one  nodule 
missed on the original isotope scan.”29 

“XRF  measurement  of  ITI  is  an  innocuous,  easy-to-
perform procedure, readily accepted by the patients, that 
probes an important parameter of thyroid function which 
had to be neglected so far because of lack of appropriate 
means.  It opens up a new field of investigations in thy-
roid  physiopathology  but  has  already  reached,  to  our 
mind, the stage of a routine clinical method.”30 

“The  introduction  of  fluorescent  thyroid  scanning  by 
Hoffer and associates in 1968, and further technical de-
velopments  over  the  ensuing  years  have  presented  us 
with a new tool of potential use in thyroid diagnosis and 
research … Fluorescent thyroid scans may be preferable 
to  conventional  scans  when  the  radiation  dose  needs  to 
be  kept  as  low  as  possible  (as  in  children  and  pregnant 
women), when an expanded iodine pool reduces the up-
take  of  the  radioactive  tracer,  and  when  a  patient  is  on 
short-term 
thyroid-stimulating  hormone-suppressing 
therapy with thyroid hormones … The technique allows 

us,  however, to follow changes  in  iodine  content  of  the 
thyroid in thyroid disease, such as Hashimoto’s thyroidi-
tis,  in  which  this  may  have  some  prognostic  implica-
tions.”31 

“The  detection  of  iodine  in  a  thyroid  nodule  by  X-ray 
fluorescence  pre-operatively  would  significantly  de-
crease  the  probability  of  malignancy  and  the  need  for 
surgical excision.”32 

Pavoni,33 as well as Reiners, et al,34 used FEA to assess 
response  of  thyroidal  iodine  after  administration  of  io-
dine  supplementation.    This  cannot  be  performed  with 
radioisotope  scanning.    Since  US  thyroidologists  and 
radiologists would not have the incentive to set up FEA 
in their practice, a grassroots effort is needed, via proper 
education of physicians about the clinical importance of 
FEA  in  medical  practice.    We  are  planning  to  evaluate 
the  saliva/serum  iodide  ratio  in  several  clinical  condi-
tions prior to and following nutritional intervention.  We 
are evaluating the possibility of setting up the FEA tech-
nology in situ in order to correlate the saliva/serum ratio 
with the thyroidal iodine content.   

About the Authors 

Guy E. Abraham, MD, is a former Professor of Obstet-
rics,  Gynecology,  and  Endocrinology  at  the  UCLA 
School  of  Medicine.    Some  35  years  ago,  he  pioneered 
the development of assays to measure minute quantities 
of  steroid  hormones  in  biological  fluids.    He  has  been 
honored as follows:  General Diagnostic Award from the 
Canadian  Association  of  Clinical  Chemists,  1974;  the 
Medaille  d’Honneur  from  the  University  of  Liege,  Bel-
gium,  1976;  the  Senior  Investigator  Award  of  Phar-
macia, Sweden, 1980. 

The applications of Dr. Abraham’s techniques to a vari-
ety of female disorders have brought a notable improve-
ment to the understanding and management of these dis-
orders.  Twenty-five years ago, Dr. Abraham developed 
nutritional  programs for  women  with premenstrual  ten-
sion syndrome and post-menopausal osteoporosis.  They 
are  now  the  most  commonly  used  dietary  programs  by 
American  obstetricians  and  gynecologists.    Dr.  Abra-
ham’s  current  research  interests  include  the  develop-
ment  of  assays  for  the  measurement  of  iodide  and  the 
other halides  in  biological  fluids  and  their  applications 
to  the  implementation  of  orthoiodosupplementation  in 
medical practice. 

David  Brownstein,  MD,  is  a  family  physician  who  util-
izes  the  best  of  conventional  and  alternative  therapies. 
(Continued on next page) 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Winter   2005 

155 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
He  is  the  Medical  Director  for  the  Center  of  Holistic 
Medicine in West Bloomfield, Michigan.  A graduate of 
the  University  of  Michigan  and  Wayne  State  University 
School of Medicine, Dr. Brownstein is board certified by 
the  American  Academy  of  Family  Physicians.    He  is  a 
member of the American Academy of Family Physicians 
and the American College for the Advancement in Medi-
cine.    Over  the  past  2  1/2  years,  he  has  had  extensive 
experience in the use of orthoidosupplementation in his 
practice. 

Jorge  D.  Flechas,  MD MPH,  is the  medical director of 
Flechas Family Practice in Hendersonville, North Caro-
lina,  specializing  in  hormonal  therapy  for  treatment  of 
fibromyalgia  and  chronic  fatigue  and  immune  dysfunc-
tion  syndrome  (CFIDS)  since  the  late  1980s.    He  also 
specializes  in  iodine  therapy  for  hypothyroidism  and 
fibrocystic breast disease. 

REFERENCES 

1)  Broekhuysen J, Laruel R, and Sion R.  “Recherches dans la serie 
des  benzofurannes  XXXVII.  Etude  comparee  du  transit  et  du 
metabolisme  de  l’amiodarone  chez  diverses  especes  animals  et 
chez l’homme.”  Arch Int Pharmacodyn, 1969; 177(2):340-359. 
2)  Abraham GE.  “The historical background of the Iodine Project.”  

The Original Internist, 2005; 12(2):57-66. 

3)  Slebodzinski  AB.    “Ovarian  iodide  uptake  and  triiodothyronine 
generation  in  follicular  fluid.    The  enigma  of  the  thyroid  ovary 
interaction.”  Domest Anim Endocrinol, 2005; 29(1):97-103. 
4)  Carrasco N.  “Iodide transport in the thyroid gland.”  Biochimica 

et Biophysica Acta, 1993; 1154:65-82.  

5)  Brown-Grant  K.    “Extrathyroidal  iodide  concentrating  mecha-

nisms.”  Physiol Rev, 1961; 41:189-213. 

6)  Spitzweg  C,  Joba  W,  Schriever  K,  et  al.    “Analysis  of  human 
sodium  iodide  symporter  immunoreactivity  in  human  exocrine 
glands.”  J Clin Endocrinol & Metab, 1999; 84:4178-4184. 

7)  Carrasco  N.    “Thyroid  synthesis  and  secretion.”    In:   Werner  & 
Ingbar’s  The  Thyroid.    Braverman  LE  and  Utiger  RD,  editors.  
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, 2000; 52-61. 

8)  Everett  LA,  Glaser  B,  Beck  JC,  et  al.    “Pendred  syndrome  is 
caused  by  mutation  in  a  putative  sulphate  transporter  gene 
(PDS).”  Nat Genet, 1997; 17:411-422. 

9)  Van Hauwe P, Everett LA, Coucke P, et al.  “Two frequent mis-
sense  mutations  in  Pendred  syndrome.”    Human  Molecular  Ge-
netics, 1998; 7(7):1099-1104. 

10) Soleimani  M,  et  al.    “Pendrin:    an  apical  Cl-/OH-/HCO3-  ex-
changer  in  the  kidney  cortex.”    Am  J  Physiol  Renal  Physiol, 
2001; 280:F356-F364. 

11) Rillema  JA  and  Hill  MA.    “Prolactin  regulation  of  the  pendrin-
iodide transporter in the mammary gland.”  Am J Physiol Endo-
crinol Metab, 2003; 284:E25-E28. 

12) Scott DA, Wang R, Kreman TM, et al.  “The Pendred syndrome 
gene  encodes  a  chloride-iodide  transport  protein.”  Nat  Genet, 
1999; 21:440-443. 

13) Fugazzola L, Cerutti N, Mannavola D, et al.  “The role of pendrin 
in  iodide  regulation.”    Exp  Clin  Endocrinol  Diabetes,  2001; 
109:18-22. 

14) Rodriguez  AM,  Perron  B,  Lacroix  L,  et  al.    “Identification  and 
characterization of a putative human iodide transporter located at 
the  apical  membrane  of  thyrocytes.”    J  Clin  Enocr  &  Metab, 

2002; 87(7):3500-3503. 

15) Viljder  JJM  and  Vulsma  T.    “Hereditary  metabolic  disorders 
causing hypothyroidism.”  In:  Werner  & Ingbar’s The Thyroid.  
Braverman  LE  and  Utiger  RD,  editors.    Lippincott,  Williams  & 
Wilkins, 2000; 733-742. 

16) Abraham GE.  “The concept of orthoiodosupplementation and its 
clinical implications.”  The Original Internist, 2004; 11(2):29-38. 
17) Abraham  GE.    “Serum  inorganic  iodide  levels  following  inges-
tion of a tablet form of Lugol solution:  Evidence for an entero-
hepatic  circulation  of  iodine.”    The  Original  Internist,  2004;  11
(3):29-34. 

18) Abraham  GE.    “The  safe  and  effective  implementation  of  or-
thoiodosupplementation  in  medical  practice.”    The  Original  In-
ternist, 2004; 11(1):17-36. 

19) Abraham GE and Brownstein D.  “Evidence that the administra-
tion of vitamin C improves a defective cellular transport mecha-
nism for iodine:  A case report.”  The Original Internist, 2005; 12
(3):125-130. 

20) Miki K, et al.  “Congenital hypothyroidism caused by a mutation 

in the Na+/I- symporter.”  Nat Genet, 1997; 16:124-125. 

21) Kilbane MT, Ajjan RA, Weetman AP, et al.  “Tissue iodine con-
tent  and  serum-mediated  125I  uptake-blocking  activity  in  breast 
cancer.”  J Clin Endocr Metab, 2000; 85:1245-1250. 

22) Eskin  BA,  Anjum  W,  Abraham  GE,  et  al.    “Identification  of 
breast  cancer  by  differences  in  urinary  iodine.”    Proceeding  of 
the Am Assoc of Cancer Res, 2005; 46:504(2150). 

23) Foss OP and Lund-Larsen PG.  “Serum thiocyanate and smoking:  
Interpretation  of  serum  thiocyanate  levels  observed  in  a  large 
health study.”  Scand J Clin Lab Invest, 1986; 46:245-251. 

24) Tonacchera M, Pinchera A, Dimida A, et al.  “Relative potencies 
and  additivity  of  perchlorate,  thiocyanate,  nitrate,  and  iodide  on 
the inhibition of radioactive iodide uptake by the human sodium 
iodide symporter.”  Thyroid, 2004; 14:1012-1019. 

25) Endo T, Kaneshiga M, Nakazato M, et al.  “Autoantibody against 
thyroid  iodide  transporter  in  the  acra  from  patients  with  Hashi-
moto’s thyroiditis possesses iodide transport inhibitory activity.”  
Biochem Biophys Res Commun, 1996; 228:199-202. 

26) Palmer  DW,  Deconinck  F,  and  Swann  SJ.    “Low  cost  intrathy-
roidal iodine quantification with a fluorescent scanner.”  Radiol-
ogy, 1976; 119:733-735. 

27) Okerlund MD.  “The clinical utility of fluorescent scanning of the 
thyroid.”    In:    Medical  Applications  of  Fluorescent  Excitation 
Analysis.  Kaufman L and Price DC, editors.  CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, FL, 1979; 149-160. 

28) Wartofsky  L.    “The  thyroid  nodule.”    In:    Thyroid  Cancer:    A 
Comprehensive  Guide  to  Clinical  Management.    Wartofsky  L,  
editor.  Humana Press, Totowa, NJ, 2000; 41. 

29) Hoffer  PB  and  Gottschalk  A.    “Fluorescent  thyroid  scanning:  
Scanning without radioisotopes.”  Radiology, 1971; 99:117-123. 
30) Jonckheer  MH  and  Deconinck  F.    “X-ray-fluorescence  determi-
nation  of  stable  iodine  in  the  thyroid  gland.    A  review.”    Acta 
Clinica Belgica, 1982; 37(1):31-40. 

31) Wahner  HW,  Sweet  RA,  McConahey  WM,  et  al.    “Fluorescent 
thyroid  scanning.    A  method  based  on  stable  iodine  measure-
ments.”  Mayo Clin Proc, 1978; 53(3):151-156. 

32) Tadros TG, Malsey MN, Fui T, et al.  “The iodine concentration 
in benign and malignant thyroid nodules measured by x-ray fluo-
rescence.”  British J Radiology, 1981; 54:626-629. 

33) Pavoni  P.    “Radioisotope  x-ray  fluorescence  technique  in  the 
dynamic  study  of  thyroid  behaviour  under  iodine  load.”    Eur  J 
Nucl Med, 1976; 1:117-122. 

34) Reiners  Chr,  Hanscheid  H,  Lassmann  M,  et al.   “X-ray  fluores-
cence  analysis  (XFA)  of  thyroidal  iodine  content  (TIC)  with  an 
improved measuring system.”  Exp Clin Endocr Diabetes, 1998; 
106:S31-S33.  u  

156 

THE ORIGINAL INTERNIST     Winter   2005