The History of Iodine in 
Medicine Part II:   
The Search for and the 
Discovery of Thyroid 
Hormones 

by  Guy E. Abraham, MD 

In 1874, Sir William W. Gull, MD, published his obser-
vations  in  five  women  suffering  from  hypothyroidism, 
which he called myxedema associated with a “cretinoid 
state.”1  Hypothyroidism was for a short time afterward 
called Gull’s disease.  This condition of unknown etiol-
ogy  was  considered  incurable  then.    Excerpts  from  the 
detailed  description  of  one  patient  with  myxedema  and 
cretinoid state by Gull follow. 

“Miss B, after the cessation of the catamenial period, 
became insensibly more and more languid, with gen-
eral increase of bulk.  This change went from year to 
year, her face altering from oval to round, much like 
the  full  moon  at  rising  …  Had  one  not  proof  that 
such  a  patient  had  been  previously  fine-featured, 
well-formed, and active, it would be natural to sup-
pose that it was an original defect such as is common 
in  mild  cretinism  …  The  mind,  which  had  previ-
ously been active and inquisitive, assumed a gentle, 
placid  indifference,  corresponding  to  the  muscular 
languor, but the intellect was unimpaired … I am not 
able to give my explanation of the cause which leads 
to the state I have described.  It is unassociated with 
any  visceral  disease,  and  having  begun  appears  to 
continue uninfluenced by remedies.” 

Not long after Gull’s publication, similar signs were re-
ported in patients following thyroidectomy.  It was then 
proposed that myxedema was due to loss of function of 
the thyroid gland.  Some 16 years after Gull’s report, a 
successful attempt was made to implant a sheep thyroid 
gland  under  the  skin  of  the  inframammary  area  of  a 
woman  suffering  from  myxedema.    The  operation  was 
followed  by  immediate  improvement.    This  case  was 
reported  by  Betancourt  from  Lisbon,  Portugal  in  the 
journal La Semaine Medicale on August 18, 1890.2 

“The  operation  was  followed  by  an  immediate  im-
provement.  Movements became  more easy and the 

speech more natural.  The number of red corpuscles 
in the  blood steadily  increased  till it  nearly  reached 
the  normal  standard  in  a  month.    The  temperature 
was raised.  The subcutaneous swelling diminished, 
and  the  patient  began  to  perspire  once  more.    The 
period of menstruation, which before had lasted for 
two and sometimes three weeks, was reduced to four 
days.” 

Since  the improvement  was  observed immediately  after 
implantation of the sheep thyroid gland, it became obvi-
ous that the beneficial clinical effect observed was due to 
a biological active compound released by the implanted 
sheep thyroid gland into the peripheral circulation of the 
patient.  One year later in 1891, based on a review of the 
literature,  including  successful  implant  of  the  thyroid 
gland in a hypothyroid patient in Lisbon, British physi-
cian  George  R.  Murray2  postulated  that  extracts  of  thy-
roid  glands  should  be  effective  in  hypothyroidism.    He 
presented  in  July  1891,  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
British Medical Association his observation of a female 
patient  with  hypothyroidism  (myxedema)  treated  suc-
cessfully with hypodermic injections of extract from the 
thyroid  glands  of sheep.    “It  is  now  three  months  since 
the treatment was commenced; it has not, however, been 
carried  out  continuously  all  the  time,  and  at  first  a 
weaker  preparation  than  that  described  was  used.    Ex-
tracts of five lobes of sheep’s thyroid have been injected, 
that  is  altogether  equal  to  the  extract  of  two  and  a  half 
thyroid glands.  The patient has steadily improved since 
the treatment commenced, and, though three weeks were 
allowed to elapse between the injections of the last two 
extracts, she did not lose any of the ground she had pre-
viously gained.”2 

a 

in 

One  year  after  Murray’s  publication,  physicians 
MacKenzie3 and Fox4 reported respectively that oral ad-
ministration  of  fresh  sheep  thyroid  glands3  and  thyroid 
extract4 were effective in reversing the signs and symp-
female  patient.  
toms  of  hypothyroidism 
MacKenzie’s  and  Fox’s  reports  were  published  back  to 
back  in  the  October  1892  issue  of  the  British  Medical 
Journal.3,4    Following  Murray’s,  MacKenzie’s,  and 
Fox’s  publications,  oral preparations  of  thyroid  extracts 
became available and were widely used to treat hypothy-
roidism.    Their  publications  reported  the  effect  of  thy-
roid  gland  administration  on  a  single  case  of  hypothy-
roidism each.  The Lisbon experiment with implantation 
of a sheep thyroid gland under the breast was also on a 
single patient.  All of the patients were women. 

Prior  to  1895,  thyroid  extracts  were  not  standardized 
based  on  iodine  content  because  the  presence  of  iodine 
(Continued on next page) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in  the  active  principle  of  the  thyroid  gland  was  not  yet 
reported.  Following Baumans’ publication in 18955 re-
porting  high  concentrations  of  iodine  tightly  bound  to 
proteins in extracts of the thyroid gland, thyroid extracts 
were  standardized  to  contain  0.2%  iodine  in  order  to 
maintain equal potency of different preparations. 

The popularity of thyroid extracts was not adversely af-
fected  by  the  introduction  of  thyroid  hormones  in  the 
1930s.    Thyroid  extracts  continued  to  be  prescribed  by 
the  majority  of  US  physicians  who  claimed  better  re-
sponse than with the use of the pure preparation of thy-
roxine.  This trend was to change following a hoax per-
petrated in 1963 with the goal of discouraging the use of 
thyroid extracts and therefore, making thyroxine the only 
eligible  thyroid  preparation  for  hypothyroidism.    To 
quote  Derry:6    “By  1976  about  half  (52%)  of  the  pre-
scriptions  written  for  thyroid  hormone  in  the  United 
States were for desiccated thyroid or other natural prod-
ucts.    The  best  pharmacological  authorities  confirmed 
desiccated  thyroid  remains  a  remarkably  clinically  pre-
dictable  and  effective  preparation  which  is  well  ab-
sorbed.  The medical letter in 1973 maintained that des-
iccated  thyroid  had  never  been  unreliable.    The  slight 
variations in the T3 levels mentioned by some are of lit-
tle clinical significance.  A large shipment to distributors 
in  Europe  and  the  United  States  in  1963  of  what  was 
supposed  to  be  desiccated  thyroid  turned  out  to  be  tab-
lets that contained iodine but no thyroid hormone.  This 
was a hoax.  Goodman and Gilman stated, ‘This episode 
gave  thyroid  a  bad  name  because  several  publications 
about  the  unreliability  of  thyroid  appeared  before  the 
hoax was uncovered.’ (1970)  This hoax is the only re-
cord of desiccated thyroid being unreliable.” 

Timing  and  synchronization  of  iodophobic  misinforma-
tion about iodine were evident in this situation.  In 1969, 
Dr.  Wolff  from  the  National  Institute  of  Health  pub-
lished his iodophobic misinformation titled, “Iodide goi-
ter and the pharmacologic effects of excess iodide.”6  A 
year later, Goodman and Gillman (1970) publicized the 
fictitious so-called “several publications” confirming the 
unreliability of thyroid extracts.  By the 1970s, thyroxine 
was the only acceptable treatment modality for hypothy-
roidism  because,  of  course,  the  iodophobic  domino  ef-
fect  of  the  1948  Wolff-Chaikoff  publication  prevented 
physicians  from  supplementing  their  patients  with  io-
dine.7,8  Keep in mind that the administration of thyrox-
ine does not lift the brain fog of iodine deprivation.   

In the late 1800s, the data available suggested that hypo-
thyroidism  was  due  to  a  deficiency  of  a  substance  se-
creted  by  the thyroid  gland,  and this  biologically  active 
substance  was  orally  bioavailable.    As  previously  men-

tioned,  the  iodine  involvement  in  this  thyroidal  com-
pound  was  not  suspected  until  1895,  when  Bauman  re-
ported  large  concentrations  of  protein-bound  iodine  in 
the thyroid gland.5  Based on his research, Bauman con-
cluded that the active substance in the thyroid gland con-
tains  iodine.    Afterward,  the  general  medical consensus 
was  that  the  active  principle  of  the  thyroid  gland  con-
tains iodine, and as a consequence, the thyroid prepara-
tions were standardized to contain 0.2% iodine in order 
to  obtain  the  same  concentrations  of  the  active  thyroid 
principle,  and  therefore  the  same  potency  between  dif-
ferent batches. 

Bauman  attempted  unsuccessfully  to  hydrolyze  thyroid 
proteins  in  order  to isolate  the  active  compound.    It  re-
mained  for  Kendall,9  from  the  Mayo  Clinic,  19  years 
later  to  successfully  hydrolyze  thyroidal  proteins  with 
sodium hydroxide in alcohol.  The hydrolysate could be 
separated  into  two  groups  —  the  first  group  contained 
compounds  that  were  insoluble  in  acid,  and  the  second  
group substances were soluble in acid.  Further hydroly-
sis of the first group yielded a compound containing io-
dine that was further purified in a crystalline form con-
taining 65% iodine.  Clinical trials with these crystals in 
hypothyroid patients proved that it was the active princi-
ple.  Kendall wrote:  “In brief, the compound containing 
iodin, the presence of which, as a normal constituent of 
the  thyroid,  as  foretold  by  Baumann  19  years  ago,  has 
been isolated in pure crystalline form, and further, it has 
been  shown  that  this  compound  is  the  substance  in  the 
thyroid which is responsible for the physiologic activity 
of the gland.” 

Kendall called it “thyroxin”, which became thyroxine in 
the 1930s at the same time “iodin” became iodine.  Un-
fortunately,  Kendall  assigned  the  wrong  structure:    an 
indol with three atoms of iodine.  “This work shows that 
it is  the  iodized  indol that produces the  physiologic  ac-
tivity.    The  actual  amount  of  the  crystalline  iodin  com-
pound  necessary  to  produce  marked  effect  is  exceedingly 
small.”  

In  spite  of  the  fact  that  Kendall  assigned  the  wrong 
structure for L-thyroxine, his crystals possessed the cor-
rect structure and full biological activity.  In the 1920s, 
Kendall’s thyroxin became available to clinicians, but it 
was extremely expensive because of the labor involved.  
As an example, Kendall stated that three tons of thyroid 
glands  yielded  only  33  g  of  thyroxin,  equivalent  to  ap-
proximately 100,000 daily doses. 

In  1926,  Harrington10  from  the  University  Medical 
School  in  London,  England  confirmed  Kendall’s  find-
(Continued on next page) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ings  and  assigned  the  correct  structure:    thyronine  with 
four  atoms  of  iodine.    Harrington  did  not  have  a  high 
opinion  of  Kendall’s  chemical  knowledge  and  his  im-
possible formula:  “Contained in this formula are several 
inherent chemical improbabilities, if not impossibilities, 
but it is perhaps not necessary to enter into the questions 
further  here,  since  a  careful  study  of  Kendall’s  paper 
reveals  that  very  slender  nature  of  the  evidence  from 
which the formula is deduced.”10 

Thyroxine exists in two isomers:  L-thyroxine, the natu-
rally occurring form, and D-thyroxine.  A racemic mix-
ture  is  a  preparation  containing  50%  L-thyroxine  and 
50%  D-thyroxine.    Harrington  proceeded  to  synthesize 
thyroxine from iodinated thyrosine.  Because of racemi-
zation,  his  preparation  contains  a  mixture  of  L-  and  D-
thyroxine.    Since  D-thyroxine  possessed  one-tenth  the 
biological  activity  of  the  naturally  occurring  isomer,  L-
thyroxine,11  Harrington’s  D,L-thyroxine  possessed  half 
the potency of Kendall’s L-thyroxine crystals.   

In the late 1920s and early 1930s, both preparations be-
came available to clinicians, Kendall’s L-thyroxine crys-
tallized  from  thyroid  glands  obtained  at  slaughter 
houses; and Harrington synthetic racemic mixture.  Both 
preparations were called “thyroxin”.  No distinction was 

Table 1 

made  between  the  two  preparations.    This  is  a  quote 
from a textbook of thyroidology published in 1932, mak-
ing  no  distinction  between  the  two  forms  of  available 
thyroxine:    “The  treatment  of  hypothyroidism  of  any 
type consists merely in the substitution of thyroid extract 
for the deficient secretion.  Any form of prepared gland 
or the active principle, thyroxin, may be used.”12 

The basal metabolic rate (BMR), developed by German 
physician Magnus-Levi in 1895,13 was the gold standard 
for the first half of the 20th century for assessing clinical 
response of hypothyroid patients to thyroid therapy.  Re-
garding the dose of “thyroxin” needed to raise the BMR 
and alleviate the signs and symptoms of hypothyroidism, 
physicians using the racemic mixture reported an effec-
tive  dosage  twice  as  high  as  the  dosages  reported  by 
those physicians using the L-thyroxine.   

Another  factor  involved  in  the  relatively  high  require-
ments of racemic and pure thyroxine — thyroidologists 
in the 1930s were unaware that the free-acid form of the 
thyroid hormone was not efficiently absorbed by the gas-
trointestinal  tract.    Because  of  low  bioavailability,  the 
free-acid  form  of  thyroxine  became  clinically  effective 
only  with  relatively  high  dosage,  requiring  up  to  1 
(Continued on next page) 

The Chronological Sequence of Events during the Search for 
and the Discovery of Iodine-Containing Thyroid Hormones 

1890 

Hypothyroidism successfully treated with implant of sheep thyroid gland.2 

1891-1892 

Hypothyroidism  successfully  treated  with  enteral  and  parenteral  administration  of  thyroid  glands  and 
thyroid extracts.2-4 

1895 

Bauman  measured  large  amounts  of  thyroidal  iodine  in  an  organic  form  firmly  held  as  a  constituent  of 
thyroidal  proteins.    He  postulated  that  the  active  principle  was  an  iodine-containing  substance.    He 
attempted unsuccessfully to hydrolyze thyroidal proteins in order to isolate the active principle.5 

Late 1890s 

Thyroid extracts standardized to contain 0.2% iodine in order to maintain equal potency between different 
preparations. 

1915 

1926 

1927 

1949 

1952 

Kendall succeeded in hydrolyzing thyroid proteins into simpler constituents.  Further purification yielded a 
biologically active iodine-containing substance which was crystallized into a pure form.  Kendall called this 
crystallized product thyroxin.  Unfortunately, Kendall assigned the wrong structure to this compound.9 

Harrington confirmed Kendall’s findings.  He assigned the correct structure:  thyroxine with four atoms of 
iodine.10 

Harrington synthesized thyroxine from iodinated thyrosine.  The end product was a racemic mixture of D- 
and  L-thyroxine.    Since  L-thyroxine  is  10  times  more  potent  than  D-thyroxine,11  the  racemic  mixture 
possessed one-half the potency of L-thyroxine. 

Chalmer  published  a  procedure  for  the  synthesis  of  pure  (non-racemic)  L-thyroxine  from  iodinated  L-
thyrosine with a high yield of 26%.14 

L-triiodothyronine (L-T3), an intermediate in the synthesis of T4 from diiodothyronine that is 3-4 times more 
potent  than  L-T4  (based on  bioassays  and  basal  metabolic  rate),15-18  is  isolated.    Synthesis  of  L-T3  is  also 
achieved. 

 
 
 
 
mg/day in hypothyroid patients to raise the BMR to the 
normal  range.    This  resulted  in  several  cases  of  iatro-
genic  hyperthyroidism  with  cardiovascular  complica-
tions,  when  the  same  effective  dosage  required  for  the 
free-acid  racemic  mixture  in  hypothyroid  patients  was 
used for the more bioavailable and more bioactive diso-
dium salt of L-thyroxine. 

The problem of racemization of L-thyrosine during iodi-
nation  and  coupling  was  solved  by  Chalmers,14  et  al  in 
1949.  To prevent racemization, the amino group of thy-
rosine  was  protected  by  acetylation  and  the  carboxyl 
group  likewise  by  esterification.    An  overall  yield  of 
26% L-thyroxine from L-thyrosine was obtained.  Mass 
production of L-thyroxine (L-T4) using Chalmers proce-
dure  increased  markedly  the  availability  and  lowered 
drastically the cost of L-T4. 

In the 1940s, a second thyroid hormone was suspected in 
thyroglobulin.   This  was  due to a  discrepancy  observed 
in the bioassay of thyroglobulin and thyroxine.  The bio-
assay  of  thyroglobulin  revealed  a  greater  biological  ac-
tivity than could be accounted for, based on the amount 
of thyroxine present in thyroglobulin.  1952 was a very 
good  year  for  L-triiodothyromine  (T3).    Four  publica-
tions  appeared  during  that  year  from  two  groups  of  in-
vestigators,  a  British/Canadian  team15,16  and  a  French 
team.17,18    The  following  achievements  were  accom-
plished in 1952: 

• 

Isolation of L-T3 from thyroglobulin 

Identification of L-T3 in plasma 

• 
•  Synthesis of L-T3 

L-T3 is a precursor of L-T4 from diiodothyronine, and its 
biopotency  revealed  that  it  was  3-4  times  more  potent 
than L-T4. 

The chronological sequence of events during the search 
for  and  the  discovery  of  iodine-containing  thyroid  hor-
mones is summarized in Table 1. 

About the Author 

Guy E. Abraham, MD, is a former Professor of Obstet-
rics,  Gynecology,  and  Endocrinology  at  the  UCLA 
School  of  Medicine.    Some  35  years  ago,  he  pioneered 
the development of assays to measure minute quantities 
of  steroid  hormones  in  biological  fluids.    He  has  been 
honored as follows:  General Diagnostic Award from the 
Canadian  Association  of  Clinical  Chemists,  1974;  the 
Medaille  d’Honneur  from  the  University  of  Liege,  Bel-
gium,  1976;  the  Senior  Investigator  Award  of  Phar-
macia,  Sweden,  1980.    The  applications  of  Dr.  Abra-

ham’s  techniques  to  a  variety  of  female  disorders  have 
brought  a  notable  improvement  to  the  understanding 
and management of these disorders. 

Twenty-five  years  ago,  Dr.  Abraham  developed  nutri-
tional  programs  for  women  with  premenstrual  tension 
syndrome and post-menopausal osteoporosis.  They are 
now  the  most  commonly  used  dietary  programs  by 
American  obstetricians  and  gynecologists.    Dr.  Abra-
ham’s  current  research  interests  include  the  develop-
ment  of  assays  for  the  measurement  of  iodide  and  the 
other halides  in  biological  fluids  and  their  applications 
to  the  implementation  of  orthoiodosupplementation  in 
medical practice. 

REFERENCES 

1)  Gull  WW.    “On  a  cretinoid  state  supervening  in  adult  life  in 

women.”  Trans Clin Soc Lond, 1874; 7:180-185. 

2)  Murray GR.  “Note on the treatment of myxoedema by hypoder-

mic  injections  of  an  extract  of  the  thyroid  gland  of  a  sheep.”  
BMJ, 1891; 2:796-797. 

3)  MacKenzie  HW.    “A  case  of  myxoedema  treated  with  great 
benefit  by  feeding  with  fresh  thyroid  glands.”    BMJ,  18912; 
2:940. 

4)  Fox EL.  “A case of myxoedema treated by taking extract of thy-

roid by the mouth.”  BMJ, 1892; 2:941. 

5)  Baumann  E.    “Ueber  das  normale  Vorkommen  von  Jod  im 
Thierkörper.” Hoppe-Seylers Z Physid Chem, 1895; 21:319-330. 
6)  Derry  DM.    Breast  Cancer  and  Iodine.   Trafford  Publ.,  Canada, 

2001; 39. 

7)  Abraham GE.  “The Wolff-Chaikoff effect:  Crying wolf?”  The 

Original Internist, 2005; 12(3):112-118. 

8)  Abraham  GE.    “The  safe  and  effective  implementation  of  or-
thoiodosupplementation  in  medical  practice.”    The  Original 
Internist, 2004; 11(1):17-36. 

9)  Kendall EC.  “The isolation in crystalline form of the compound 
which occurs in the thyroid: its chemical nature and physiologic 
activity.”  JAMA, 1915; 64:2042-2043. 

10)  Harington CR and Barger G.  “Thyroxine III.  Constitution and 

synthesis of thyroixine.”  Bio Chem J, 1927; 21:169-183. 

11)  Lerman  J  and  Harington  CR.    “The  physiologic  activity  of 
tetrabrom-thyronine  and  tetrachlorthyronine.”    J  Clin  Endocr, 
1949; 9:1099-1106. 

12)  Diagnosis  and  Treatment  of  Diseases  of  the  Thyroid  Gland.  

Rowland AF, editor.  WB Saunders Company, 1932; 98. 

13)  Magnus-Levi  A.  “Uber myxodema.”  Ztschr f klin Med, 1904; 

52:201.  Berl Klin Woch, 1895; 32:650-652. 

14)  Chalmers  JR,  Dickson  GT,  et  al.    “The  synthesis  of  thyroxine 
and related substances.  Part V.  A synthesis of L-thyroxine from 
L-tyrosine.”  J Chem Soc, 1949; 3424-3433. 

15)  Gross  J  and  Pitt-Rivers  R.    “The  identification  of  3:5:3’-L-
triiodothyronine  in  human  plasma.”    The  Lancet,  1952;  1:439-
441. 

16)  Gross  J  and Pitt-Rivers  R.   “Physiological  activity  of  3:5:3’-L-

triiodothyronine.”  The Lancet, 1952; 1:593-594. 

17)  Roche  J,  Lissitsky  S,  and  Michel  R.    “Sur  la  triiodothyronine, 
produit intermédiaire de la transformation de la diiodothyronine 
en thyroxine.”  Compt Rend Acad Sci, 1952; 234:997-999. 
18)  Roche J, Lissitsky S, and Michel R.  “Sur la presence de triiodo-
thyronine dans la thyroglobuline.”  Compt Rend Acad Sci, 1952; 
234:1228-1230.  u