The History of  Iodine in Medicine 
Part III:  Thyroid fixation and medical iodophobia 

Guy E. Abraham, M.D. 

The thyroid gland-iodine connection was known just a few years following the discovery of  iodine 
in seaweed in the 1811.  Only 8 years after this discovery, iodine was used effectively in the 
treatment of  simple goiter.  However, the medical uses of  iodine during the first century since the 
discovery of  iodine were not restricted to diseases of  the thyroid gland only but covered a wide 
range of  clinical conditions (1). 

In the early 1920’s, Marine reported a positive effect of  iodide supplementation at 9 mg/day in the 
prevention of  simple goiter among adolescent girls (2,3).  That amount of  iodine was based on 
research performed in farm and laboratory animals regarding the effect of  iodine on thyroid 
function and also overall performance.  However, in Marine’s studies on adolescent girls, the only 
parameter assessed was the presence of  goiter.  Following Marine’s studies, iodine sufficiency 
became associated with the absence of  goiter, not overall performance such as grades in classes, 
number of  absences due to sickness, etc. 

As a public measure to control goiter, iodization of  table salt was implemented successfully in the 
USA between 1917 and 1924.  That is, iodization of  table salt was successful in decreasing 
markedly the incidence of  simple goiter in the supplemented population.  Keep in mind that the 
amount of  bioavailable iodine (0.05 mg/day) needed to prevent cretinism, endemic goiter and 
hypothyroidism is 60 times less than the amount of  iodide (9mg/day) used by Marine (2,3) in the 
original studies.  Thyroidologists assumed that, with iodization of  table salt, iodine deficiency 
became a thing of  the past.  That was the beginning of  thyroid fixation.   

Prior to the iodization program, the public was relying on iodine preparations from apothecaries 
for their iodine needs.  The recommended daily amount of  iodine was 0.1 ml to 0.3 ml Lugol 
containing 12.5 to 37.5 mg elemental iodine (4).  This is exactly the amount of  iodine needed for 
whole body sufficiency, based on a recently reported iodine/iodide loading test by the author (4).  
Some propaganda was used following iodization of  salt to discourage the public from using the 
iodine preparations such a Lugol solution and to rely instead on iodized salt for their iodine needs.  
In 1926, physician C.L. Hartsock, from Cleveland, Ohio (5), wrote:  

“…iodized salt is now being very much more extensively used by the public than 
other forms of  iodine, such as sodium iodide, iodostarine and compound solution of  
iodine (Lugol’s solution), probably because of  the propaganda to insure its use…”.   

Iodized salt was unfortunately used as substitute for the previously recommended forms of  iodine/
iodide.  The bioavailable iodide from iodized salt is only 10% of  the estimated 0.75 mg iodide in 
iodized salt consumed per day (6).  That amount, 0.075 mg of  bioavailable iodide, represents less 
than 1% of  the amount of  iodide used in Marine’s study (2,3) that is, 9 mg; and also less than 1% 
of  the recommended daily intake of  iodine from Lugol solution.  Implementation of  iodization of  

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
salt was associated with an increased incidence of  autoimmune thyroiditis (4). 

Instead of  iodized salt, Hartsock (5) recommended the use of  a tablet of  iodine/iodide in known 
and fixed amounts as the best form of  supplementation, just like the most popular form of  
supplementation used today for vitamins, minerals and trace elements.   

“Tablets containing definite amounts of  iodine seemed to be the method of  choice.”    

With the availability of  thyroid hormones in the 1930’s, iodine was completely ignored by 
thyroidologists in the treatment of  iodine deficiency-induced goiter and hypothyroidism.  A 
textbook entitled “Diagnosis and Treatment of  Diseases of  the Thyroid”, edited by Amy Rowland 
and published in 1932, contained chapters from 24 thyroidologists of  that time (7).  Although the 
most common cause of  hypothyroidism and simple goiter worldwide is iodine deficiency, the 
recommended treatment of  hypothyroidism was summarized in 2 sentences:  

“The treatment of  hypothyroidism of  any type consists merely in the substitution of  
thyroid extract for the deficient secretion.  Any form of  prepared gland or the active 
principle, thyroxin, may be used.”   

Iodine neglect in the 1930’s by thyroidologists progressed to medical iodophobia in the late 1940’s 
and early 1950’s.  Following World War II, there was a systematic attempt to remove iodine from 
the food supply of  Christian America.  Iodophobic misinformation, well synchronized with the 
introduction of  alternatives to iodine supplementation in medical practice, strongly suggest a well 
planned conspiracy by agents of  foreign powers planted at strategic positions in academia and the 
regulatory agencies (8).  U.S. physicians became the stooges of  these agents of  foreign powers.  
Iodophobic misinformation permeated all textbooks of  medicine and the subspecialties.  From 
books written by physicians for physicians and for the consumers, iodophobia, which has reached 
pandemic proportions, trickled down to books written by lay persons for consumers (4,9).   

A new syndrome, medical iodophobia, was recently reported (4).  Medicoiodophobes suffer from:  
A) Split personality which results in iodophobia within the orthoiodosupplementation range 
previously used safely and successfully in medical practice and iodophylia for megadoses of  iodide 
(up to 12gm/day). B) Double standards, which render those physicians intolerant to the minor side 
effects of  the inorganic forms and extremely tolerant toward severe side effects of  the radioactive 
and organic forms. C) Amnesia toward the inorganic nonradioactive forms when making 
therapeutic decisions. D) Confusion, attributing the severe side effects of  organic iodine containing 
drugs to inorganic iodine/iodide. E) Altered state of  consciousness, allowing doublethink, 
doublespeak and contradictory logic to become acceptable.   

Although the factors involved in medical iodophobia are still unknown, decreased cognition seems 
involved.  Since low iodine intake is associated with intellectual impairment, deficiency of  this 
essential element cannot be ruled out, and if  present, would create a self-perpetuating 
phenomenon.  Needless to say that medical iodophobia is contagious and can be transmitted to 
patients and other physicians (iatrogenic iodophobia).  Although there is yet no official report from 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the Center for Disease Control regarding the prevalence of  medical iodophobia in the U.S. medical 
community, it is likely that this syndrome has reached pandemic proportion.   

Medical iodophobia will remain a syndrome until the causes are discovered and effective therapy 
implemented.  The disastrous effect on the U.S. population of  the zombification of  the medical 
profession through iodine deprivation is already evident.  Implementation of  the 
orthoiodosupplementation program in the medical community is highly recommended.  The 
increased cognition of  health care professionals, resulting from orthoiodosupplementation, will 
eventually trickle down to patients in the form of  a more enlightened approach to patient care.     

Before World War II, non-radioactive forms of  inorganic iodine were considered a panacea for all 
human ills (10), but today, they are avoided by physicians like leprosy.  Who, what, killed iodine?  
The first nail in the iodine coffin was the publication by Wolff  and Chaikoff  from U.C. Berkley in 
1948 (11), describing their finding in rats administered iodide in increasing amounts by 
intraperitoneal injection.  When serum inorganic iodide levels reached 0.2 mg/L, that is 10-6M, 
radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland became undetectable.  The correct interpretation would be: 
Iodide sufficiency of  the thyroid gland was achieved when serum inorganic iodide levels reach 10-
6M, as we previously discussed (9).  But Wolff  and Chaikoff  concluded that serum inorganic iodide 
levels at a concentration of  10-6M blocks the synthesis of  thyroid hormones, resulting in 
hypothyroidism and goiter.  These authors did not measure thyroid hormones in the rats studied.  
Hypothyroidism and goiter were not observed in those rats.  This fictitious phenomenon became 
known as the Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect (12).  Because these law-abiding rats refused to become 
hypothyroid and instead followed their normal physiological response to the iodide load, they were 
unjustly accused of  escaping from the law of  the Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect.  Labeling these innocent 
rats as fugitives was a great injustice against these rodents.    

The second and final nail in the iodine coffin was hammered in by Wolff  in 1969 (12).  By 1969, 
Doctor Wolff  had moved to the National Institute of  Health from U.C. Berkley.  Wolff  arbitrarily 
defined 4 levels of  “iodine excess”.  The first level of  excess started with intake above 0.2 mg/day, 
and iodide intake of  2 mg or more was considered “excessive and potentially harmful”.  By the 
1970’s, physicians concluded that one must avoid inorganic non-radioactive iodine like leprosy, 
unless it was incorporated into the toxic organic iodine containing drugs.  Then iodine could be 
tolerated because iodine could be blamed for the toxicity of  these drugs.   

Whereas the first wave of  medical iodophobia was initiated in 1910 by the pen of  one man, Swiss 
surgeon, Nobel laureate, Professor Theodore Kocher and lasted some 15 years (1910-1925) (1), the 
second wave of  medical iodophobia initiated in 1948 by the pen of  two men, Wolff  and Chaikoff, 
is alive and well even after some 60 years of  existence.   

As unbelievable as it may sound, the Kocher Iodophobic Effect was initiated by a report from 
Kocher one year after he received the Nobel Prize, stating that he (Kocher) experienced symptoms 
of  hyperthyroidism following ingestion of  potassium iodide.  One man, reporting his experience 
using iodine on himself  initiated the first wave of  medical iodophobia.  After 15 years of  
intimidation, preventing the widespread effective use of  iodine, due to the Kocher Iodophobic 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Effect, physicians were able to escape from the Kocher inhibition because of  poor synchronization 
of  iodophobic publications and a small nucleus of  enlightened members of  the medical profession.  
The amazing success and long duration of  the Wolff-Chaikoff  Iodophobic Effect on the medical 
community is most likely due to the well synchronized timing of  a series of  iodophobic 
publications and also due to iodine deprived and zombified physicians who were unable to escape 
from the Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect.  The rats used in the Wolff-Chaikoff  Experiment were successful 
in escaping from Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect because they received significant amounts of  iodine, 
improving their cognition.   

The proper terminology for the Wolff-Chaikoff  effect is “The Wolff-Chaikoff  Iodophobic 
Domino Effect”.  I will give one example, just one example, of  the iodophobic domino effect of  
the Wolff-Chaikoff  1948 publication (11), resulting in the removal of  iodine from a very important 
staple food in the USA, that is our daily bread which contained the full RDA of  0.15 mg per slice 
for a period of  about 20 years between 1960 to 1980 (4,9). 

Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? (Isaiah 55:2) 

In the early 1960’s, potassium iodate was added to bread as a dough conditioner.  Iodate was added 
with the purpose of  oxidizing sulfhydryl groups of  flour proteins and thereby improving the 
rheological properties of  the dough.  By oxidizing sulfhydryl groups, iodate is reduced already 
during mixing of  the dough and it reaches the consumer as iodide (13).  This was an oversight by 
the agents of  foreign powers planted at strategic positions in academia and the regulatory agencies.  
Obviously, they are not infallible.  As mentioned previously, one slice of  bread contained the full 
RDA of  150 ug (14,15).  This amount of  the dezombifier iodine in a major staple food of  
Christian America could not be tolerated for long.  Something had to be done and fast.  The Wolff-
Chaikoff  Domino Effect was used to deiodize bread, concomitant with an increased concentration 
of  the goitrogenic, carcinogenic and zombifying bromate in our food and water supplies (8).  The 
following describes the sequence of  events in this Domino Effect.   

Because of  isotope dilution effect, the percent of  radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland 
decreased from 20-30% to 10-20%, following iodization of  bread.  In 1965, London et al (16), 
from the National Institute of  Health, evaluated the amount of  iodine present in 32 bakery 
products from 12 different commercial bakeries.  They reported that a typical diet contributed to 
approximately one mg of  iodine per day and 726 ug came from bakery products.  Concern was 
expressed over the inhibition of  thyroid hormone synthesis in thyrotoxic patients at those levels of  
iodine.  The last sentence of  their publication read: “One milligram of  iodine will suppress the 
uptake of  radioactive iodine by the normal thyroid gland, probably by simple dilution of  the dose, 
and may considerably reduce organic binding of  iodine in the thyroid glands of  thyrotoxic persons 
(8).”  Reference 7 of  their manuscript is a study published in 1949 by Stanley (17) one year after the 
Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect was reported in rats (11).  The first paragraph of  Stanley’s manuscript stated 
the objective: “The interest of  thyroidologists was recently aroused by the demonstration by Wolff  
and Chaikoff  (2) that, with levels of  serum iodide higher than 20 to 30 micrograms per cent, 
organic binding of  iodine in the rat thyroid was inhibited.  Extension of  these observations to man 
was undertaken…”.   

4 

 
 
 
 
 
The interest of  thyroidologists could not have been aroused so quickly by the publication of  Wolff  
and Chaikoff  in The Journal of  Biological Chemistry (11), a journal involved in publishing research 
in the basic sciences, not clinical medicine.  The thyroidologist with aroused interest was Stanley 
himself  who obviously had insider’s information in order to publish his manuscript within a year 
following the Wolff-Chaikoff  publication, considering the fact that it takes several months for the 
review process in peer review journals, and that it would have required several months for him to 
design and perform his experiments after reading the Wolff-Chaikoff  paper.  During the year 
Stanley published his “extension of  the Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect to man”, he co-authored a paper 
with Astwood on the use of  goitrogens in the management of  patients with Graves’ disease as an 
alternative to inorganic iodine/iodide.   

It is a strange coincidence that the investigators who authored the iodophobic publications, 
regarding the so-called inhibition of  organic binding of  radioactive iodide in the thyroid gland by 
the administration of  inorganic nonradioactive iodide, were also involved in testing goitrogens in 
laboratory animals and in normal human subjects; and implementing the use of  these goitrogens as 
an alternative to inorganic iodine/iodide in patients with Graves’ disease (4). 

Some 4 years after London’s publication (16), Pittman et al (14) reported in 1969 on the negative 
impact of  iodization of  bread, that is, as far as Pittman et al (14) appraised it.  Remember this is the 
same year Wolff  published his iodophobic review (12).  Again, timing and synchronization of  
iodophobic misinformation is critical for the destruction of  Christian America.  Events that seem 
unrelated but well synchronized for maximum effect is a key ingredient for the successful outcome 
of  deception.   

Pittman et al (14) compared the mean value of  the 24 hr radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland in 
a group of  63 euthyroid subjects prior to iodization of  bread with another group of  53 euthyroid 
subjects following the use of  potassium iodate in bread.  These investigators also measured 24 hr 
urine iodide levels and serum inorganic iodide in some subjects of  both groups.  The 24 hr 
radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland for both groups were (×± SD): pre-iodization of  bread: 
28.6 ± 6.5%; and post-iodization of  bread 15.4 ± 6.8%.  We have previously reported the 
correlation between 24 hr radioiodide uptake by the thyroid gland with the average daily intake of  
iodine, based on a review of  the published literature (9).  The data simplified is displayed in Fig. 1.  
Thyroid gland sufficiency for iodide is achieved with a daily intake of  6 mg.  For whole body 
sufficiency, daily intake between 12.5 to 50 mg is required (4). 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Percent

30

20

10

i

d
o
r
y
h
T
e
h
t
y
b

I
1
3
1

f
o
e
k
a
t
p
U
r
h
4
2

30

20

10

.1

1

6

10

100

Daily iodide intake (mg)

Fig. 1 Percent 24hr uptake of radioiodide following intake of increasing amount 

of iodide.  Thyroid sufficiency is achieved with a daily iodine intake of 6mg, 
that is where the slope crosses the x axis at zero radioiodide uptake.  
(Modified from Abraham et al, Original Internist 9:30-41, 2002).

Pittman et al (14) estimated a mean daily intake of  680 ug, that is 0.68 mg iodine in the group 
studied post-iodization of  bread.  These investigators were alarmed by such unexpectedly 
“excessive” intake of  iodine, resulting in these subjects being “heavily loaded with iodine”.  This is 
a quote from the discussion section of  their publication: 

“Evaluation of  several aspects of  iodine kinetics in 30 of  our euthyroid subjects 
revealed them to be heavily loaded with iodine.  We had anticipated that local subjects 
probably ingested liberal quantities of  iodine, but we had not expected to find such 
high values as 680 ug per day for the urinary iodine excretion or 1.9 ug per 100 ml for 
the plasma inorganic iodide concentration (PII).  These values are far in excess of  
most in the literature and approach those found in groups ingesting diets unusually 
rich in iodine.” 

Pittman et al were referring to mainland Japanese who consume a daily average of  13.8 mg (13,800 
micrograms) of  iodine from seaweed when they mentioned “groups ingesting diet unusually rich 
with iodine”.  Based on statistics generated some 20 years ago, mainland Japanese represent one of  
the healthiest nations on earth (4,9).  At the time of  Pittman’s publication, iodophobic 
misinformation from the Wolff-Chaikoff ’s Domino Effect was so widespread that bread makers 
were already looking for an alternative to iodates as dough conditioners.  They first considered 
azodicarbonamide, but it was too toxic, so they settled for bromate, a goitrogen with carcinogenic 
and zombifying potentials (4).  Pittman et al (14) were elated with this move by bakers to replace 
iodates with azodicarbonamide.  They stated: 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Bread makers are using a new organic agent, azodicarbonamide, to an increasing 
extent to replace the halogens.  If  this trend continues, dietary iodine from this source 
may fall to low levels.” 

To recapitulate on the Iodophobic Domino Effect of  the Wolff-Chaikoff  forgery: 

1948:  Wolff-Chaikoff  (W-C) forgery (11) 
1949:  Stanley supposedly extended the fictitious W-C effect observed in rats to humans (17) 
1965:  London et al (16) from the National Institute of  Health quoted Stanley’s forgery to alarm 

their readers about their findings of  “large quantities” of  iodine in bread 

1969:  Pittman et al (14) confirmed London’s findings of  “excessive iodine” in bread 
1969:  Wolff ’s iodophobic review (12) 
Late 1970s to Early 1980s:  Bakers replace iodate with bromate as a dough conditioner.  Bromate 

From 1980 to 2000: 

is a goitrogen, carcinogen, and a zombifying agent (4). 
Increased prevalence of  obesity, diabetes, hypertension, cancer of  the 
breast and thyroid glands in the U.S. Populations (4). 

We have previously presented evidence that iodophobic misinformation in medical textbooks may 
have contributed to the high prevalence of  breast cancer in the U.S. female population (4,9).  
Unfortunately, the latest Ninth Edition of  Werner & Ingbar’s The Thyroid, published in 2005 (18) 
contains the same iodophobic misinformation promulgated in the Eighth Edition published in 
2000 (19).  In the Eighth and Ninth Editions, Roti and Vagenakis wrote the section on “Effect of  
Excess Iodide” (20,21).  Quotes from the Eighth Edition: 

“Strong evidence indicates that excess iodide can induce thyroid dysfunction, and 
these iodine-induced abnormalities in thyroid function are the subject of  this 
subchapter.” 

“Occasionally drinking water may be a source of  excess iodine intake, such as in some 
Chinese countries where the drinking water has an iodine concentration of  300 to 462 
µg/L.  The population residing in those areas has a urinary iodine excretion rate as 
high as 900 µg/L.” 

These authors used micrograms instead of  milligrams to make the numbers appear “excessive”.  
They considered iodide concentrations between 300 to 462 µg/L (0.3- 0.46 mg/L) in drinking 
water as excessive.  Yet, studies performed in the U.S. for 5 years in a prison inmate population 
consuming drinking water containing 1 to 2 mg/L (1,000 to 2,000 ug/L) of  iodine (22) reported no 
complication. 

“Because of  the increasing difficulty experienced by many communities in achieving 
satisfactory disinfection of  public water supplies with acceptable concentrations of  
chlorine, a feasibility study on the use of  iodine for this purpose was undertaken”.  
“The effectiveness, ease of  administration and palatability were prime reasons for 
considering iodine as a disinfectant of  community water supplies”.  “effective 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
bacteriological control of  the water was maintained by all concentrations of  iodine 
used in this study”.  “At an iodine concentration of  1 mg/liter (1 ppm), the water met 
all standards for safety and palatability (1962 USPHS Drinking Water Standards)”.   
“During the five years in which this study was conducted no instances of  urticaria or 
iodism were observed. … for serum thyroxine were unaffected by iodination of  the 
water supply. … None of  the prison inmates developed clinical evidence of  
hyperthyroidism or hypothyroidism throughout this study.”    

Several other studies confirmed the safety of  inorganic non-radioactive iodine in daily amount 
greater than the amount Roti and Vagenakis considered toxic.  For example, Clement (23) in 
Tasmania, reported that a daily intake of  1.4 mg of  potassium iodide (10 times the RDA) by infants 
and children for 16 years resulted in reduction in the prevalence of  goiter, but in some regions, that 
amount of  iodine was not sufficient enough to have a significant effect on the rates of  goiter.     

In the 2005 Edition (21), Roti and Vagenakis repeated the same iodophobic misinformation 
promulgated in 2000 Edition and added a new one: 

“A group of  American volunteers working in west Africa had a median urinary iodide 
excretion of  5.048 ug/L, due to a faulty iodination system, and some developed goiter 
and subclinical hypothyroidism (26).” 

A review of  their reference 26 revealed that this manuscript was poorly documented and should 
not have qualified for publication in the Journal of  Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism unless 
some heavy weight coauthor threw his weight around to get it through.  In the manuscript entitled 
“Effects of  Chronic Iodine Excess in a Cohort of  Long-Term American Workers in West Africa” 
by Pearce, et al (24), 102 Peace Corp volunteers were evaluated during and 30 weeks after they 
cease to ingest water from filters containing organic-iodine iodophores.  During the period the 
subjects were using the iodine containing filters, the urinary concentrations of  iodide had a mean 
value of  5 mg/L.  Serum iodide levels had a mean value of  0.29 mg/L.  Based on renal clearance 
of  iodide, that is 43.5 L/day (6), the average daily intake of  iodine in these subjects calculated from 
the mean serum iodide level is: 0.29 mg/L × 43.5 L/day = 12.6 mg/day.  This is the average daily 
intake of  60 million mainland Japanese (4,9), one of  the healthiest populations on planet earth.  
The following quotes from Pearce’s publication are evidence of  a faulty experimental design.  It is 
very surprising that such a mediocre manuscript made it through just because it is iodophobic: 

“Corps volunteers were authorized to receive a follow-up evaluation by an 
endocrinologist after returning from Niger.  Some follow-up evaluations were 
incomplete, as some of  the subjects chose not to visit an endocrinologist upon 
returning, and different endocrinologist obtained different follow-up laboratory 
studies. … Ultrasound evaluation was not performed. … No volunteers had overt 
symptoms of  thyroid dysfunction as evaluated clinically.” 

In the discussion section of  their publication, Pearce et al did not fail to mention the fictitious 
Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect as if  it was a proven fact.  More than 50 years after the Wolff-Chaikoff  

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
forgery, it is still quoted in iodophobic publications.   

“Acute excess iodine ingestion has long been known to result in a transient decrease in 
iodine organification, termed the acute Wolff-Chaikoff  effect.” 

Attempts to reproduce the Wolff-Chaikoff  experiments in rats by other investigators were 
unsuccessful.  In vitro studies revealed that concentrations of  iodide as high as 10-2M were required 
to interfere with the mechanisms involved in cellular uptake and organification of  iodide (25).  
These amounts are 4 orders of  magnitude greater than 10-6M serum iodide proposed by Wolff  and 
Chaikoff  to cause inhibition of  organification of  iodide by the thyroid gland.  Yet, thyroidologists 
refer to these in vitro studies to confirm the Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect.  They must think we are really 
stupid.  Daily intake of  50 gm (50,000,000 micrograms) iodide would be required to achieve these 
peripheral levels of  10-2M in the adult human subject (4), a heroic amount by any standard.  

In the Eighth Edition of  “The Thyroid”, Meier and Burger (26) called iodine a contaminant that 
interferes with the destructive effect of  goitrogens.  Obviously, thyroidologists hate the thyroid 
gland. 

“There is a marked competition between iodide and the thionamides for the active 
site of  TPO. … In situations of  severe iodine contamination, these are the two major 
mechanisms leading to the loss of  efficiency of  these drugs.  It is also likely that 
iodine contamination reduces the capacity of  the thyroid to concentrate the 
thionamides.” 

However, in the Ninth Edition, they were kinder and gentler to iodine – they stopped calling iodine 
a contaminant (27).  They just wrote that it is “excess” iodine that is the problem.  The amount of  
daily intake of  iodine that protects the thyroid gland from the harmful effects of  iodine inhibitors 
is called by these thyroidologists “severe iodine excess”.  They have gone berserk!   

“There is a marked competition between iodide and the thionamides for the active 
site of  TPO. … In situations of  severe iodine excess, these are the two major 
mechanisms leading to the loss of  efficiency of  these drugs.  It is also likely that 
iodine excess reduces the capacity of  the thyroid to concentrate the thionamides.” 

Keep in mind that these drugs block the uptake of  iodide not only by the thyroid gland but also by 
every target organ of  the human body.  Why would anyone in his/her right mind want to 
concentrate iodine-blocking agents in the thyroid gland and the rest of  the body because of  iodine-
deficiency induced hyperthyroidism?  These patients need more iodine, not iodine blocking agents. 

Thyroidologists have become so destructive that some of  them recommend radioiodine ablation 
of  the thyroid to allow the reintroduction of  the toxic organic iodine containing drug amiodarone 
in patients with a prior history of  amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis.  To quote Hormida et al 
(28):  

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“…However, hypothyroidism should be viewed as a goal, rather than a complication 
of  treatment in these patients”.  

Farwell et al (29) recommend “near total thyroidectomy” in cases of  “resistant amiodarone-
induced thyrotoxicosis: 

“…we suggest that near-total thyroidectomy warrants considerations as definitive 
treatment for resistant amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis.” 

How come cardiologists never considered inorganic non-radioactive iodine as first line of  therapy 
in cardiac arrhythmias instead of  the toxic sustained release iodine drug, amiodarone??  A careful 
review of  published data on amiodarone suggests that this organic iodine containing drug is a 
sustained release form of  iodine.  The iodine released is the active agent with the drug itself  being 
the cause of  its toxicity (30).  Inorganic non radioactive iodine is the treatment of  choice in those 
clinical conditions currently treated with amiodarone.   

In their 2001 publication, Martino et al (31) reported a list of  side effects and complications of  
amiodarone: corneal microdeposits = 100% of  the cases; anorexia, nausea = 80%; skin 
photosensitivity and discoloration = 55-75%; neurological symptoms = 48%; abnormal liver tests 
= 25%; thyroid dysfunction = 14-18%; lung dysfunction = 10-13%.  The pulmonary toxicity is the 
most serious complication of  amiodarone therapy, with a fatal outcome in 9% of  the patients 
experiencing this side effect of  amiodarone (32).   

It is hard to believe that such a drug is widely used by U.S. physicians in medical conditions where 
inorganic non-radioactive iodine has never been tested.  Connolly (33) in his 1999 review of  
amiodarone efficacy and safety reported: 

 “On the basis of  the number of  prescriptions filled in retail pharmacies, amiodarone 
was the most often prescribed antiarrhythmic agent, account for 24.1% of  the total 
antiarrhythmic prescriptions in 1998.”   

He further commented that amiodarone accounted for 33 to 74% of  prescriptions in Europe, 
North and South America, compared to 0.3% in Japan, which is 100 times less than the other 
countries mentioned.  It is of  interest that mainland Japanese consume at least 100 times the RDA 
for iodine (9,34).  That is at least 100 times more iodine than countries with 100 times more 
prescriptions for amiodarone.  Regarding the evidence based analysis of  amiodarone efficacy and 
safety, Connolly stated: 

10 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“The general view that amiodarone is the most useful drug for VT and VF, 
notwithstanding the rather modest evidence from randomized trials, led to its being 
adopted as the standard medical therapy in several recent randomized secondary 
prevention trials evaluating the ICD. … A meta-analysis of  these trials based on 
individual patient data yielded a relative risk reduction in all-case mortality of  13% to 
15%, which was of  borderline statistical significance (P=0.03 or 0.06 depending on 
analytical method used).”   

When endocrinologists from India reported the presence of  biologically active sodium/iodide 
symporter (NIS) in breast tissue from women with intraductal carcinoma (35), they totally ignored 
the obvious implications for the therapeutic use of  inorganic non-radioactive iodine in patients 
with breast cancer.  They showed their preference for the systemic use of  radioiodide.  This form 
of  therapy would expose every organ of  the body to the carcinogenic and cytotoxic radioiodide.  
They have gone berserk! 

“The unequivocal demonstration of  NIS expression, its functionality and retention of  
iodine by organification further provides supportive evidence for use of  radioiodine 
as an additional treatment modality of  human breast carcinoma.” (35) 

After 60 years in the Dark Ages, following the second wave of  medical iodophobia, inaugurated by 
the Wolff-Chaikoff  Iodophobic Effect (11,12), iodine is emerging recently as an important nutrient 
for protection against breast cancer and the degenerative diseases of  the Western World (4,6,8,9,36-
45).  For the first time, a simple loading test became available to assess whole body sufficiency for 
iodine (4). For the first time, a simple test became available to asses the efficiency of  cellular iodide 
uptake system using the saliva/serum stable iodide ratio (44).  For the first time, the detoxifying 
effect of  iodine at 50 mg/day on the toxic halides fluoride and bromide was reported (40).  For the 
first time, evidence for an enterohepatic circulation of  inorganic iodine was presented (41).   

For the first time, a mechanism used by the human body to prevent iodine overload was reported 
(4,38): In cases of  whole body deficiency, the ingested iodine/iodide is retained by the body in 
proportion to the degree of  deficiency.  At sufficiency, the amount of  iodine absorbed is 
quantitatively excreted in the urine as iodide, therefore protecting the body against iodine overload.  
In the adult, 1500 mg of  iodine was retained at sufficiency (41), an amount 50 times higher than the 
amount of  total body iodine reported in medical textbooks.  We have confirmed (38) the 
observation of  our medical predecessors (46) that iodine detoxifies the body from the heavy 
metals, lead and mercury.   

For the first time, evidence that the administration of  Vitamin C improves a defective cellular 
transport system for iodine was reported (39).  So far, every case of  iodine transport inefficiency 
we had studied, has responded to a complete nutritional program, including several grams of  
Vitamin C.  Iodine alone in daily amounts of  50 mg or more is also effective in cases of  iodide 
symport inefficiency.   

11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The iodine/iodide loading test to assess whole body sufficiency for iodine becomes more accurate 
by implementing a complete nutritional program for one month prior to the loading test.  In cases 
of  iodine transport inefficiency, the high urinary excretion of  iodide would give the false 
impression of  iodine sufficiency (38,39).  By correcting this inefficiency of  the iodine transport 
system through nutritional intervention (38,39), prior to performing the loading test, this test 
becomes more accurate.  The loading test is not reliable in patients on antithyroid drugs which 
inhibit oxidation and organification of  symported iodide in the target cells.  This results in a high 
urinary excretion of  iodide, giving the false impression of  whole body sufficiency.   

References 

1)  Abraham, G.E., The history of  iodine in medicine. Part 1: From Discovery to Essentiality.  The Original 

Internist, 13(1):29-36, 2006. 

2)  Marine D., Kimball, B.S., The Prevention of  Simple Goiter in Man, J. Lab Clin Med., 3:40-48, 1917. 
3)  Marine D., Prevention and Treatment of  Simple Goiter, Atl. Med. J., 26:437-442, 1923. 
4)  Abraham, G.E., The safe and effective implementation of  orthoiodosupplementation in medical practice.  The 

Original Internist, 11:17-36, 2004. 

5)  Hartsock, C.L., Iodized Salt in the Prevention of  Goiter.  Jour. Amer. Med. Assoc., 86:1334-1338, 

1926. 

6)  Abraham, G.E.:  The concept of  orthoiodosupplementation and its clinical implications.  The Original 

Internist, 11:29-38, 2004. 

7)  Diagnosis and Treatment of  Diseases of  the Thyroid Gland.  Editor Amy F. Rowland, W.B. Saunders 

Company, 1932, pg. 98. 

8)  Abraham, G.E., The Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect: Crying Wolf?  The Original Internist, 12(3):112-118, 

2005. 

9)  Abraham, G.E., Flechas, J.D., Hakala, J.C., Orthoiodosupplementation: Iodine sufficiency of  the whole 

human body.  The Original Internist, 9:30-41, 2002. 

10)  Kelly, Francis C., Iodine in Medicine and Pharmacy Since its Discovery – 1811-1961. Proc R Soc Med 

54:831-836, 1961. 

11)  Wolff, J. and Chaikoff, I.L., Plasma Inorganic Iodide as a Homeostatic Regulator of  thyroid Function. J. 

Biol. Chem, 174:555-564, 1948. 

12)  Wolff, J., Iodide Goiter and the Parmacologic Effects of  Excess Iodide. Am J. Med. 47:101-124, 1969. 
13)  Burgi, H., Schaffner, Th., Seller, J.P., The Toxicology of  Iodate: A Review of  the Literature.  Thyroid, 

11:449-456, 2001. 

14)  Pittman et al, Thyroidal Radioiodine Uptake.  N. Engl. J. Med., 280:1431-1434, 1969. 
15)  Wartofsky, L., Ingbar, S.H., Estimation of  the Rate of  Release of  Non-thyroxine Iodine from the Thyroid 

Glands of  Normal Subjects and Patients with Thyrotoxicosis.  J. Clin. Endocr., 33:488-500, 1971. 

16)  London, W.T., Vought, R.L., Brown, F.A., Bread – a Dietary Source of  Large Quantities of  Iodine.  

New Engl. J. Med., 273:381, 1965. 

17)  Stanley, M.M., The direct estimation of  the rate of  thyroid hormone formation in man. The effect of  the 

iodide ion on thyroid iodine utilization.  J. Clin. Endocr., 9:941-954, 1949. 

18)  Werner & Ingbar’s The Thyroid. Braverman LE and Utiger RD Editors, Ninth Edition, 

Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005. 

19)  Werner & Ingbar’s The Thyroid. Braverman LE and Utiger RD Editors, Eighth Edition, 

12 

 
 
 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000. 

20)  Roti, E., Vagenakis, A.G., Effect of  Excess Iodide: Clinical Aspects.  In Werner & Ingbar’s The 

Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger RD Editors, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 316-329, 
2000. 

21)  Roti, E., Vagenakis, A.G., Effect of  Excess Iodide: Clinical Aspects.  In Werner & Ingbar’s The 

Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger RD Editors, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 288-305, 
2005. 

22)  Thomas, W.C., Black, A.P., Freund, G., et al, Iodine Disinfection of  Water.  Arch. Environ. Health, 

19:124-128, 1969. 

23)  Clements, F.W., Goitre prophylaxis by addition of  potassium iodate to bread. The Lancet, 1:489-492, 

1970. 

24)  Pearce, E.N., … Braverman, L.E., Effects of  Chronic Iodine Excess in a Cohort of  Long-Term 
American Workers in West Africa.  J. Clin. Endocr. & Metab., 87:5499-5502, 2002. 
25)  Pitsiavas, V., Smerdely, P., Boyages, S.C., Amiodarone compared with iodine exhibits a potent and 

persistent inhibitory effect on TSH-stimulated cAMP production in vitro: a possible mechanism to explain 
amiodarone-induced hypothyroidism.  European J. Endocr., 140:241-249, 1999. 

26)  Meier, C.A., Burger, A.G., Effects of  drugs and other substances on thyroid hormone synthesis and 

metabolism.  In Werner & Ingbar’s The Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger RD Editors, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 265-280, 2000. 

27)  Meier, C.A., Burger, A.G., Effects of  drugs and other substances on thyroid hormone synthesis and 

metabolism.  In Werner & Ingbar’s The Thyroid – Braverman LE and Utiger RD Editors, 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 229-246, 2005. 

28)  Hermida, J.S., Jarry, G., Tcheng, E., et al, Radioiodine Ablation of  the Thyroid to Allow the 

Reintroduction of  Amiodarone Treatment in Patients with a Prior History of  Amiodarone-Induced 
Thyrotoxicosis. Am. J. Med., 116:345-348, 2004. 

29)  Farwell, A.P., Abend, S.L., Huang, S.K.S., et al, Thyroidectomy for Amiodarone-Induced Thyrotoxicosis.  

JAMA, 263(11):1526-1528, 1990. 

30)  Phillippou, G., Koutras, D.A., Piperingos, G., et al, The effect of  iodide on serum thyroid hormone levels 

in normal persons, in hyperthyroid patients, and in hypothyroid patients on thyroxine replacement.  Clin. 
Endocr., 36:573-578, 1992. 

31)  Martino, E., Bartalena, L., Bogazzi, F., et al, The Effects of  Amiodarone on the Thyroid.  Endocrine 

Reviews, 22(2):240-254, 2001. 

32)  Dusman, R.E., et al, Clinical Features of  Amiodarone-Induced Pulmonary Toxicity.  Circulation, 82:51-

59, 1990. 

33)  Connolly, S.J., Evidence-Based Analysis of  Amiodarone Efficacy and Safety.  Circulation 100:2025-

2034, 1999. 

34)  Abraham, G.E., The Wolff-Chaikoff  Effect: Crying Wolf?  The Original Internist, 12(3):112-118, 

2005. 

35)  Upadhyay, G., Singh, R., Agarwal, G., et al, Functional expression of  sodium iodide symporter (NIS) in 

human breast cancer tissue. Breast Cancer Research and Treatment 77:157-165, 2003. 

36)  Abraham, G.E., Flechas, J.D., Hakala, J.C., Optimum Levels of  Iodine for Greatest Mental and Physical 

Health.  The Original Internist, 9:5-20, 2002. 

37)  Abraham, G.E., Flechas, J.D., Hakala, J.C., Measurement of  urinary iodide levels by ion-selective 

electrode: Improved sensitivity and specificity by chromatography on anion-exchange resin.  The Original 

13 

 
Internist, 11(4):19-32, 2004. 

38)  Abraham, G.E., The historical background of  the iodine project. The Original Internist, 12(2):57-66, 

2005. 

39)  Abraham, G.E., Brownstein, D., Evidence that the administration of  Vitamin C improves a defective 

cellular transport mechanism for iodine: A case report. The Original Internist, 12(3):125-130, 2005. 

40)  Abraham, G.E., Iodine Supplementation Markedly Increases Urinary Excretion of  Fluoride and Bromide.  

Townsend Letter, 238:108-109, 2003. 

41)  Abraham, G.E., Serum inorganic iodide levels following ingestion of  a tablet form of  Lugol solution: 
Evidence for an enterohepatic circulation of  iodine. The Original Internist, 11(3):29-34, 2004. 
42)  Brownstein, D., Clinical experience with inorganic, non-radioactive iodine/iodide. The Original Internist, 

12(3):105-108, 2005. 

43)  Flechas, J.D., Orthoiodosupplementation in a primary care practice. The Original Internist, 12(2):89-96, 

2005. 

44)  Abraham, G.E., Brownstein, D., Flechas, J.D., The saliva/serum iodide ratio as an index of  sodium/

iodide symporter efficiency. The Original Internist, 12(4): 152-156 , 2005. 

45)  Abraham, G.E., Brownstein, D., Validation of  the orthoiodosupplementation program: A Rebuttal of  

Dr. Gaby’s Editorial on iodine.  The Original Internist, 12(4): 184-194 , 2005. 

46)  Encyclopedia Britannica, Vol. 11, 1910-1911-Under “Iodine”. 

14